# June 30, 2020

Worked on website
Now the About page, logo, and cover photo are up. Still need to figure out how to add daily journal entries.

## Read Chapter 1 of Charles Dickens *Hard Times*.

### Here are some of my thoughts.

Language of sowing and vessels in the introduction.

Gradgrind’s framework of utilitarianism and seeing his students as “vessels” to be filled with facts eventually causes the females (such as Louisa) to become physically sterile and subject to loveless relations. Gradgrind’s emphasis on being useful to the industry squashes out their humanity and emotional facets, mimicking the pernicious effects of industrialization on the greater social milieu.

Perpetuity of a society relies on female (and male, but for the purposes of Victorian imagery, more female) fertility. The imagery of sowing and strangulation suggest the industry is sowing knowledge in a manner that causes the females to become sterile and wasted

Gradgrind’s intense focus of facts... “With a rule and a pair of scales, and the multiplication table always in his pocket, sir, ready to weigh and measure any parcel of human nature, and tell you exactly what it comes to” eerily parallels the development of the medical gaze and subsequent power dynamic between patient and doctor. Gradgrind’s pupils, like the patient, have their humanity and voiced concerns silenced.

A kind of violence in Gradgrind’s love for facts: “he seemed a kind of cannon loaded to the muzzle with facts, and prepared to blow them clean out of the regions of childhood at one discharge.”
Almost sexual in nature, sounds like he is de-flowering them in some way. Again, here is a possible link between violent imagery, female bodies, and the disintegration society.

Bitzer is Gradgrind’s model student of facts, but it seems like the facts have drained him of color and vitality. Could the same be applied to Louisa, who is a student of her father’s?
“the boy was so light-eyed and light-haired that the self-same rays appeared to draw out of him what little colour he ever possessed.”
