
# July 2, 2020

Continued reading Swenson

## Chapter 3 “Sex and Fair Play”

This chapter discusses medical women in literature written by non-female-doctors.

**The two main issues regarding whether women can practice medicine: the implications toward their sexuality and the idea of equal opportunity**

### Reade’s *The Woman Hater*

This novel set the precedence for medical women in Victorian fiction. Reade was incensed at the lack of fair play for the Edinburgh 7 (i.e. the unfairly awarded scholarship to the second-best male, rather than the academically better female), and he modeled Dr. Rhoda Gale off of Sophia Jex Blake

Dr. Rhoda Gale is masculinized, with more focus on her medical skill rather than her beauty / other traditionally feminine characteristics. For example, when Severne throws Ina across the room, they rely on Gale’s medical expertise, rather than her emotional support, to save Ina.

For Victorians, there is a **scary ambiguity in her sexuality**, since she seems to spurn male companionship in favor of **protolesbian** relations. Indeed, she falls in love with one of her patients, although it is unclear if she falls in love in a friendly female friendship way, or something more intimate.

Dr. Gale epitomizes the belief that the female doctor acts as protection for the innocent woman against unwanted male sexual aggression

Despite Reade seeming to champion women’s right and fair play in practicing medicine, he ultimately adopts a patronizing tone toward Dr. Gale, who all along is under the patronage and care of Vizard. She remains Vizard’s “virago” and ends up adopting the familiar female subservience to the male doctor.

**Trope: ambiguous sexuality for female doctors… are they un-marriageable?**

Alexander’s *Dr. Victoria* follows traditional guidelines on marriageability of women. Victoria is an illegitimate child, and she self-selects herself out of the marriage pool due to this stain. However, her mannish qualities (i.e. un-marriageability) and competency in medicine make her the perfect doctor, and she proves herself not to be the “superfluous woman” by curing her family of various diseases / “curses.” However, she helps keep the status quo by leading the women around her to marriage. Victoria’s illegitimacy and success as a doctor suggest that the *fallen woman and the doctor were related by their “irregular sexuality.”*

**Then there were other novels that focused the plots on sex and romance, since those two would help book sales. Here, the focus shifted from doctors’ competency to their beauty and femininity**

Wilkie Collins’ “Fie Fie! The Fair Physician” presents a very “sexed” (i.e. not unsexed) female doctor who flirts with her male patients and even tries to steal an engaged man. This novel echoed the sentiment that **female doctors shouldn’t treat male patients**, which feminist female doctors also believed in (so as to further their cause with less backlash).

**America was generally more progressive than Britain in allowing women to practice medicine, and their resulting literature was less sensationalistic / more optimistic for women doctors being competent at their jobs.**

Phelps’ *Doctor Zay* describes a doctor who nurses an ill Yorke (who is emasculated as a result of his illness) to health. Dr. Zay is very hard working and competent and rejects suitors’ advances. However, when Yorke proposes marriage, she accepts, and she is in a sense “tricked.” The novel details her feminine exhaustion from work and how Yorke is always there for her. So the novel morphs from that of progressive feminism back to the entrenched romance plot. Note that this book is American.


### Anne Eliot’s *Dr. Edith Romney*
Romney is a highly successful doctor and displaces Fullagher. Fullagher is mad at how it’s all-of-a-sudden trendy to have female doctors, and he sets Fane to destroy Romney. Obviously, the book is criticizing the violated sense of fair play on Fane’s part, but it is more so criticizing the working class for not accepting a female doctor, blaming them for society’s quagmire in creating more progressive female doctor characters (in both real life and in fiction).

Fane succeeds in discrediting Romney and ruining her practice, but he falls in love with her when he sees how beautiful she is. He proposes marriage, and she responds that they would be incompatible due to her love for practicing medicine. However, Fane misinterprets and says that he doesn’t see practicing medicine as integral to her identity. They do get married, and Fane’s career and happiness are both ambiguous at the end of the novel.

Romney comes to an epiphany during her illness (caused by the intense stress of losing her practice) that there are significant barriers for female doctors. She had originally believed that no more restrictions existed, since she had had little trouble in becoming a doctor. But now she realizes that there is still discrimination because she is female.

**This book is not that progressive because it emphasizes Romney’s salvation in her good looks, and suggests that she is unable to persevere in the medical field due to her feminine delicacies.**


### Arthur Conan Doyle’s *The Doctors of Hoyland*

This novel is a parody of the previous tropes discussed, showing how male doctors can learn to accept competent female doctors. Dr. Smith, through her competency, is able to steal patients from Dr. Ripley, and it is her competency that romantically attracts Dr. Ripley to her. Indeed, Dr. Smith is not a great beauty, and she rejects Dr. Ripley’s advances because she would like to choose to focus on her career. And wow, no bad ending for her!
