
# July 1, 2020

Figured out how to upload journal entries.

Read introduction and chapter 1 of Swenson’s *Medical Women*

## Overview of Swenson’s *Medical Women*:
### Chapter 1
A reading of Gaskell’s *Ruth* and how nursing was a redemptive role for the fallen woman. Also, a discussion of how literature not only mirrored historical sentiments, but also contributed to society’s view of medical women as the “lady with the lamp.”

### Chapter 2
Backlash against females with medical knowledge due to males coming back from Crimean War and being worried about women taking over their jobs. Sexualisation and demonization of nurses due to their knowledge of the human body. “Sexuality fully expressed and fully repressed”

### Chapter 3
Women wanting to become doctors due to higher pay. Doctors were accused of lesbianism and “unsexing” due to medical knowledge preventing them from doing their normal maternal duties. Overcame this obstacle because female doctors can treat female patients.

### Chapter 4
Analyzed fiction written by female doctors, Kenealy (more focused on eugenics issues) and Todd (more focused on the balance between work and life). Although both examined on the prestige and struggles of female doctors, they nevertheless diverged in their focus.

### Chapter 5
Discusses female doctors out in the British colonies. Distinctions between American vs British, nurse vs doctor, male vs female are brushed aside for the distraction between races. Female doctors gained glory by helping with imperialism.


## Interesting follow up readings:

Catherine Judd’s *Bedside Seductions*

Ann Ardiss’ *New Women, New Novel*

Gaskell’s *Ruth*


Kingsley’s *Two Years Ago*

*Harper Magazine’s* “Episode of War”

## Chapter 1 Key Points:

**Anticontagionism** is the idea that sickness not only spreads between poor, filthy immoral people, but that it starts with them. While this sounds like a victim-blame-y concept, it was surprisingly conducive to public health reform and getting women to join the nursing profession. Since nurses were seen as being more moral, some believed they were safe from diseases and had the courage to step up to front lines, treating very sick soldiers in the Crimean War.

That said, health reformers suggested that poor peoples’ increased rates of disease weren’t due to inherent biological differences, but rather due to corruption / uncleanliness / moral lassitudes of everyone in society. In effect, it is a societal issue.

To this effect, Gaskell’s *Ruth* derides the corrupt authorities (and also Ruth’s seducer) and Kingsley’s *Two Years Ago* derides everyone, from the unclean people to the clergymen.

Nursing was inevitably tied to prostitution, since they both involved disease (treating vs. transmitting), sexual knowledge of strangers’ bodies, and women working for wages. Gaskell echoes this by having society first see Ruth as a fallen woman, but then give her back her value as a nurse treating society for its sins / diseases. However, Ruth ultimately dies because of her seducer’s sin, suggesting that the female nurse is still entrenched in Christian values.

Nightingale tries to create a wholesome image of the nurse (i.e. Lady with the Lamp), which was strongly enforced by her ties to the media. During the Crimean War, England needed a “Lady Bountiful” and strong female moral leadership, which Nightingale tried to exemplify. She was often criticized for being overly paranoid about flirtatious / husband-bagging nurses, but they were a real issue, since they detracted from the angelic nurse image.

In “Episode of War” and *Two Years Ago*, it is suggested that nursing during the Crimean War was an extension of the woman’s domestic role at home, since many women (including upper class) tended to the sick anyway. Indeed, in *Two Years Ago*, Valentia goes from tending her sick sister at home to her sick brother on the battlefield to returning home to care for her orphaned nieces/nephews. *Two Years Ago* also contained a subplot of Grace nursing Dr. Thurnall. Their relationship becomes romantic and Grace becomes subservient to Thurnall’s wishes / medical advice, thus indicating how female nurses were subject to male doctors’ orders.

Nightingale and Gaskell both wanted the nursing profession to be an outlet for the “superfluous woman” (aka prostitute / widow) for them to have income and use their talents. Interestingly, their image of the ideal nurse often had middle-class feminine sensibilities. When women started coming to the hospitals, a hierarchy would often form, where the working class women were subject to the menial, dirty work, and the middle class women (with their sensibilities and delicacies) became administrators.

*Two Years Ago* and “Episode of War” (where Sara eventually cries at the bedside of a former, dying love) both suggest that nursing isn’t necessarily an ends in and of itself, but rather a step toward more domesticity at home.
