
# July 6, 2020

## Chapter 4 The New Woman Doctor Novel

### Margaret Todd’s *Mona MacLean, Medical Student*

Written by an actual female doctor, this novel is seen as more progressive for feminists because it does not attempt to fit the female doctor into a single role or suggest their inevitable nervous breakdown due to the pressures of the job.

There are multiple endings for the various female doctors; Mona becomes a doctor and becomes happily married, sharing an equal footing with her doctor husband. Lucy decides to choose career over marriage, and Doris is pressured to forego medicine; nevertheless, Doris helps the feminist cause in other ways.

**Subversion of the traditional romance plot**... We see Mona MacClean falling in love with Dudley after an act of charity, which follows the traditional Victorian plot. However, Dudley remains in love with Mona due to her skill as a doctor, rather than in spite of it.

Mona suggests, **“Mothering is woman’s work without a doubt, 
but she does not need to have children of her own in order to do it,”** and she keeps true to this progressive promise when she tends to a pregnant girl at the end of the novel. Indeed, a female doctor can be a “mother” by helping other mothers, with medical expertise.

**Strong social / emotional / financial relationships between women** are emphasized because they are crucial to maintaining a shared sense of purpose (rather than competition) at women’s medical schools. Modeled off of Sophia Jex Blake’s own female relationships.

**Novel portrays Mona as womanly**... even her uncle, who originally felt sad about the “sacrifice” of femininity that medical school would cause, is convinced that Mona retains her grace and beauty. Indeed, Mona loves to go window shopping and be the bourgeois woman that she is.

**In order to gain mainstream acceptance, not only did female doctors have to prove themselves as better doctors than men, they also had to fight for their share of patients**

As a result, although *Mona MacLean* is progressive in terms of its advocacy for the legitimacy of the female doctor, it is not as progressive for other female initiatives, such as suffrage. Todd suggests that it is the woman’s job to do her work quietly and well, rather than to prate about further reform. She is satisfied with the current status of things and suggests women should be grateful for what they already have.

Like many female doctors supported the Contagious Disease Acts (which I thought was surprising... maybe do some more research to verify this??), Mona seems to be reticent on the subject of male doctor on female patient assault. However, by bringing up a subplot involving such as case, Todd perhaps argues that female doctors are necessary to prevent these types of happenings.

### Kenealy’s *Dr. Janet of Harley Street*

Primarily discussing the unfairness / out-datedness of loveless marriages based on economic gain; Kenealy suggests that these marriages are unnatural and put women in a difficult social position. 

In line with the New Women doctor novels written by female doctors, *Dr. Janet* is progressive when it comes to removing blame for societal ills from the female prostitute. Instead, she shares the blame with the profligate, venereal disease-spreading, immoral Marquis. I’m wondering if the 60 year Marquis + 17 year Phyllis’s marriage union was something that was “normal” for the time, or if it would elicit some icky feeling then as it does today?

Kenealy instead champions Phyllis’s relationship with Liveing instead, who Phyllis naturally falls in love with. Kenealy supports their bigamous, adulterous union because she suggests that a woman’s role is in bearing children (thus opposing Todd’s suggestion that motherhood could be achieved without physical children), and Phyllis’s Union with Liveing is better, eugenically speaking.

The novel promulgates a scientific feminism that suggests that men are closer to natural / the brute, making women and maternity the ideology of “True Womanhood.” Unfortunately, this comes at the cost of suggesting women should not pursue their studies seriously, as such study will decrease their maternal instincts. There is a **feminist vs. maternalist woman doctor** debate.

## Chapter 5 Medical Women and Imperial Fiction

Revisionist idea: Swenson suggests that women doctors helped stabilize imperialism, and imperialism in return gave women fewer obstacles to becoming doctors. **While Victorians were still affronted by the unsexed (or occasionally hyper-sexualized) female doctor at home, they were more OK with the idea of women doctors working far away in the colonies.** Working in a colony often made them viewed as feminine (in context) enough to be “marriageable,” and the stories discussed all end in marriage for the white female doctor.

Unsurprisingly, the native people of the colonies were caricatured and viewed as inferior to whites, both in literature and in society. The Eastern societies were seen as corrupt, with their standards of living and enlightenment worse than that in the West. Eastern medicine was seen as ancient, in collusion with witchcraft, dirty, and definitely lagging behind in Western medicine (see Gagool / Sitabhai / Khadija, as described below / in tomorrow’s post). Indeed, Kipling writes “The Song of the Women” from the Indian woman’s perspective, and sings how “we have seen the light, and it were grievous/ To dim that dawning if our lady leave us.” Here, the light and the lady refer to the white female doctor.

Also unsurprisingly, **racist views were grounded in biology**; British people thought that even if Eastern people were taken out of their society and given all the opportunities in the West, they would still somehow come out inferior since they were not white.

Many imperialist adventure novels were doubly problematic (at least in my eyes) due to their racialist perspectives and also their suggestion that women doctors were incapable of effecting any useful change in the East, and that they were better suited as mothers.

Swenson writes about Victorian literature’s portrayal of the Eastern woman: “powerful Eastern women in Orientalist discourse are nearly always corrupt, since Eastern cultures were defined by the West as providing no legitimate, lawful routes for women to gain power.” **This blanket denigration of Eastern women (and their society at large) was of course, very beneficial to white females because now they had a mission to go to these countries and morally civilize them.** Indeed, even progressive women such as Mary Wollstonecraft subscribed to this belief. I couldn’t help reading this passage with a heightened awareness of the racial implications, uncovering how mass media, “progressive politics,” and racism all go hand in hand to benefit one group of people.

Medicine is also one of the only respectable ways for a woman to go East for an extended amount of time.

### Rider Haggard’s *King Solomon’s Mines*

Barely ascribes Eastern women to womanhood, only thinking to classify the most westernized Eastern women under that category, and only as an afterthought. The main characters are all white men on an adventure in Africa, and they go so far as to equate African womanhood and “fiend.”

Two African women, Foulata—the one who nurses people with feminine care—and Gagool—the one who manipulates men with her Eastern, ancient medicine—are foils for each other. The white men suggest that Foulata would be desirable to marry, which echoes Victorian sentiments that medical women should be maternalistic / feminine. In the end, however, Foulata and Gagool kill each other, reinforcing the notion that Foulata could never marry the white men due to her black skin. In other words, **racial barriers will always supersede differences in gender or medical knowledge (at least for this novel and many other imperialist adventure novels).**

### Kipling’s *The Naulahka*

Soooo problematic in its portrayal of female doctors, but let’s talk about it!! Also, as you’ll probably see, I am *not* a fan of Kipling at all.

The novel portrays the gender inequality across all castes in Indian culture and does not diminish the suffering that Indian women endured (through purdah and other negligent events). Dr. Kate (from Colorado) is convinced to go to India and help out at a hospital after she listens to Rambai’s emotional appeals to Americans to free Indian women from “life-long slavery and infernal misery.”

**Kipling suggests that Kate’s work and worldly knowledge will unsex her and make her lose her sexual function as a woman.** He suggests that Kate’s good intentions are misguided because her role is at home in America, not in the East where her womanly abilities are useless.

Although Kipling sets white culture superior to Indian culture many times throughout the novel, he **ultimately tries to unite the two cultures through their supposed shared “myth of motherhood”** that acts as “the fundamental source of human sympathy.” Indeed, the Indian queen asks Kate what authority she has a doctor of life, when she has never given life before. Of course, this is a very sexist thing to say, suggesting that female doctors are not legitimate unless they subscribe to the status quo and are conventionally married and have children.

While Kipling draws the emphasis on motherhood across both cultures, he conveniently myopic when it comes to marriage similarities between the two. Kate’s marriage with her beau back in Colorado (who came to India to win her back) seems as inevitable as the Indian marriages that are descried in the novel.
