
# July 8, 2020

Read Chapters 1 and 2 of *Gendered Pathologies*

## Chapter 1 Science, Gender, and the Nineteenth Century (cont. from yesterday)

By the late 19th century / early 20th century, sexologists gradually changed the public discourse about female sexuality, suggesting that **women naturally had *some* sexual feeling toward white men**. While superficially liberating, this new suggestion came with **the pathologization of too little or too much or deviant female sexuality**.  Indeed, this forced heteronormativity heavily stigmatized fallen women, women who did not desire sexual relations with men, and prostitutes.

## Chapter 2 Towards a discourse of Perversion

**Using Dickens’ *Hard Times*, Archimedes analyzes how the female body represents the social body and is therefore pathologized in unnatural, decaying societies.** While Archimedes connects Dickens’ criticism of industrial society to his larger criticism of utilitarianism, it is interesting that *Hard Times* was published before *Origin of Species*, *The Social Organism*, and many other influential works on utilitarianism. She notes that in order for Spencer and Darwin’s books to be influential, seeds of these sentiments had already germinated in industrial towns such as Manchester (caricatured as Coketown in the novel).

Spencer suggests that it is natural for certain parts of the social body to get better while others die, noting that both a physical body and a society move on when parts of it die. Similarly, Malthus suggests that it is organic and equitable for some people to suffer, as long as the society is moving forward as a whole (so basically, utilitarianism). In *Hard Times*, Dickens instead argues that if the society is to be seen as a whole organism, then **corruption in one individual will cause corruption in the society; in the same vein, an unnatural environment will corrupt its members.**

Dickens argues that **industrial society’s pre-occupation on facts, numbers, and utilitarianism, as exemplified by Mr. Gradgrind, is an unnatural environment where children’s natural creative / emotional instincts are squashed.** As a result of this poisoned environment, Louisa and Tom are self-centered and morally ambiguous, isolating themselves from bourgeois standards . Even for people that were supposedly doing well (economically), Spencer’s argument of society regulating itself naturally falls apart.

Throughout the book, there is a flower / garden motif, where the individuals are the flowers and the society is the soil they are planted in. Sissy Jupe is from the circus, which represents imagination and mutual-interdependence, and she is associated with a healthy flower. However, Louisa, due to her father’s unnatural focus on facts, feels like her garden is empty, and she continually turns a blind eye at the morally questionable things that Bounderby does. In addition, Sissy, although she is from the working class, is portrayed as a woman of middle class bourgeois ideals. **Unsurprisingly, since Sissy is so caring and morally upright, she is the one who “deserves” to be reproductively fertile at the end of the novel.**

Louisa and Tom’s incestuous relationship (not explicitly intimate, but Louisa seems to only be able to care for Tom), causes the disintegration of many of their familial and friendly ties. At first, it seems like Dickens is criticizing Louisa’s deviant sexuality for society’s corruption. However, upon a closer look, **it isn’t incest itself that Dickens criticizes, but rather how Louisa and Tom’s relationship parodies incest.**

Incest was a hotly debated topic in the Victorian era, with both proponents for and critics against it. In literature, incest between siblings (could be sexual, but more often just an extremely close, “more-than-sibling” type of thing) was a rather common trope, especially in Dickens’ work. Incest was sometimes seen as a good way of “sibling familialization,” where siblings were brought closer together into a family unit, as a means of bringing the family closer / ensuring the tight-knit bond. Other novels, and especially poetry, saw incest as a means of social disintegration. **In Dickens’ previous works, incest is often seen as a means of living out the nostalgia of an Edenic youth and a means of comfortable domesticity through marriage.**

However, rather than truly loving each other, Tom merely uses Louisa’s affection for his own economic gain, **making a mockery of the bourgeois esteem of sibling love.** On Louisa’s side, her lack of humanities training makes her self-absorbed, only able to care for Tom. In this narrow-mindedness, she transgresses morally, and has social “disaffectation.”

Unsurprisingly, **Louisa’s social transgressions are soon correlated to her sexual deviancy,** as defined by when she decides to leave Bounderby and go to her father’s house, effectively deserting her husband. This is paralleled by Mrs. Blackpool, the other fallen woman in the novel (it is implied that she is a prostitute, or at the very least, unfaithful to her legal husband).

Ultimately, Louisa’s inability to reproduce suggests that her unnatural environment that she grew up in makes her unable to conform to bourgeois conventions and tainted. **Her body retains the mark of this mechanical, statistics-focused world. Dickens suggests that such an industrialized world cannot possibly be part of the social organism that Spencer will later propose, and that the society’s health is dependent on the health of all its individuals.**
