
# July 9, 2020

## Chapter 3 Women, Savages, and the Body of Africa

**Archimedes discusses Haggard’s *She*, an imperial gothic/ imperial romance / late Victorian male romance novel centered on two males travelling to Africa.**

*She* was written during a time of much social/ political change that caused male anxiety: **worries that the male was becoming less masculine, worries about the morality behind imperialism, worries about male aesthetics, etc.** *She* reproduces White male bravery through racial interactions and the pathologization of the female body.

Two white, male travelers—Holly, a Cambridge professor, and Leo, a hardy, courageous young man—go to Africa in search of Leo’s heritage. **Leo is described as embodying both the bourgeois ideals of courage and loyalty *and* the “primitive” / “native” ideals of grace, strength, and vigor.** As a result, there is see-sawing between the ascendancy of “primitive” and “civilized” traits. However, **Haggard quickly makes a clearer distinction between the travelers and the Amahaggar (fictional tribe in Africa) by describing the Amahaggar’s practice of cannibalism and their non-white skin.**

By conflating physical capability with mental capability / bourgeois ideals, Haggard suggests that Leo is a natural-born leader who just needs to discover himself some more in Africa. Archimedes argues that Leo is portrayed as being superior due to his white lineage / blood.

**In the mid-1800’s, the concept of race shifts from being a social-cultural difference (that was man-made and thus could be adapted to) to one grounded in biology.** This change to biomedical discourse was supposedly scientifically backed, and this gave the change more credibility. The social sciences and medicine took note form the physical sciences, treating their subjects as objects to be examined (through a totally infallible objective lens, of course!), thus giving white scientists the authority to determine what was natural, what was superior, etc. Basically, this supposed objectivity in science allowed for more white supremacy.

Indeed, **Haggard uses Holly’s supposed scientific authority and objectivity to demonstrate how seemingly abnormal desires can be justified in the white man, but not the non-white man.** Holly and Billali are both somewhat erotically interested in a dead woman’s body, specifically her severed feet. However, Billali’s interest is described purely with erotic overtones, while Holly takes the feet away from Billali, in the interest of scientific inquiry. Thus, Holly’s interest is normalized / hidden by his objectivity.

**There is the storyline of Ayesha forcing the monkey-looking Holly to bow down to her, Holly refusing, Ayesha then forcing him to bow down with her beauty, and then Ayesha subsequently turning into a primitive monkey-like figure herself.** This storyline suggests that white men are superior to other races / genders—ultimately, they always come out on top.

Criminologist Lombroso suggested that criminals tended to have Black physical characteristics (crazy man lol!) and that it suggested white people were more “evolved” than other races. **He suggests a hierarchy with white at the top, “yellow” people in the middle, and Blacks at the bottom.** His work ends up being very influential, and he explains how white people sometimes still commit crime because there is still a bit of the Black person inside them.

For Victorians, one of the most “unnatural” things in race relations was the inter-mingling of races, as it was deemed that nature naturally separated the races, and to have interracial children was to be against the bourgeois ideal of white supremacy. **In *She*, the fictional Amahaggar are described as a decaying, primitive tribe, and this is partially due to the fact that many in the tribe as mixed-race.** The Amahaggar originally descended from the people of Kor, who were not black (possibly Arabic or Asian), who then mated with Black people in Africa. The supposed sexual deviance in these immoral interracial relations is what makes Holly so disgusted.

Following Edwin Chadwick’s suggestion that immorality breeds dirty air and sickness, Haggard goes on to describe how diseased the air and landscape are. He suggests that this biological manifestation of disease is directly linked to the Amahaggar’s immoral practices, and Haggard conveniently forgets all the diseases that Europeans spread to Africa…. (Smh)

In the Victorian era, landscapes were often compared to female bodies. This occurred in geographic literature and more broadly when sailors populated lands with sirens and mermaids etc.

During the Victorian era, **there was a great fear of the “Amazons,” who had matriarchal societies,** and where females supposedly mutilated males (and Victorians extrapolated this image to having the female eat the males as well). Anthropologists such as Bachofen suggested that female-dominated societies were a relic of evolutionary history. Following Russett’s “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny,” it **suggested that matriarchal societies simply weren’t evolved enough (aka primitive / savage).** This ties into how the Amahaggar society was ruled by Ayesha, a woman; subsequently, the Amahaggar society is seen as decaying.

With Black people seen as the lowest in the social hierarchy, **the black body, both male and female, was strongly associated with sexual deviance.** Indeed, scientists tried to look for similarities between the genitalia of white prostitutes and black women, their thought process being that white prostitutes had some sort of “throwback” to a less-evolved time. (This is obviously all wrong, but I can’t help thinking about how this stereotype still permeates today, where our president can call whole racial groups “rapists” and still have people support him..)

**Ayesha embodies many contradictions regarding her purity and race.** Although her hands and facial features, combined with her Arabic origins, suggest that Ayesha is white, she rules over a community whose ancestors included black people and possible Asian people as well. Thus, Ayesha is simultaneously “pure” due to her pure Arabic descent, but also primitive and incompatible with Western ideals due to her connections to Blackness and Asians. **As a result, even though Ayesha is white, she is able to embody the “savagery” of the Amahaggar tribe, allowing the transgressiongs of the tribe to recede into the background.**


Ayesha is very much the opposite of the Victorian “angel of the house.” She rules over a cannibalistic kingdom that does not care for each other, she is very overt bout her sexuality, and she is very brutal. This suggested deviant sexuality, and the novel displaces the society’s ills onto her body via a narrative shift.

**Victorians believed that “hybrids” (i.e. crosses between species, or, in the human case, interracial offspring) were less fertile and would create a decay in society as they continued to reproduce.** This is reflected in the mixed-race Amahaggar tribe, which is also quite infertile. Even though they reproduce, they often lose members to internal wars, disease, and lack of nurturing. This **infertility is reflected in a landscape made of catacombs, poisonous wombs, and a blur between those living and those that are dead.**

Of course, infertility was primarily seen as the female body’s problem, and and in this way, the novel refocuses its attention to Ayesha’s body. Accordingly, Ayesha becomes completely withered by the end of the novel, returning to her “primitive” form. This suggests that her body is a metaphor for the diseased landscape and tribe, whose “true” form isn’t far from Ayesha’s true form.
