
# July 2, 2020

## Chapter 2 of *Medical Women*

Victorian discomfort about the newly independent woman. Some claimed their paid work outside the home would “denature” them because “They who enter on the career of a nurse... can hardly fail . . . to degenerate socially and in­tellectually. The sphere of a woman’s life is so bounded by. . . the domes­tic hearth, that it is not surprising when separated from these she should become hard, egotistical, and even given to drink.” -George Barraclough (1879)

After the Crimean War, nursing is seen as a means to more domesticity (ie better housewife). (See Mary Ward’s *Marcella*)

Nightingales *Notes on Nursing* strongly advocated formal nursing training and warned against the idea that any loving woman is an official nurse. However, the public ran with her statement that “Every woman, or at least almost every woman, in England has, at one time or another of her life, charge of the personal health of somebody, whether child or invalid,—in other words, every woman is a nurse”

Dickens’ *Bedside Experiments* infantilises the nurse into a “fairy nurse” that didn’t seem to require intense training

Anthony Trollope’s *Orley Farm* suggests that otherwise well off women become emotionally and sexually vulnerable when they nurse ill men. He also suggests the danger in the nun-like personas that nurses have, since both overt sexuality and popish behaviors both threaten domesticity. Marriage is a “prescription” for these ills.

Rhoda Broughton’s *Second Thoughts* has an heiress nurse fall in love with a doctor.

**Trope: Professional nurses and incompetent old nurses act as threats / foils to the main protagonist nurse, who almost always ends up married**

In line with the sensationalist Victorian novels after the Crimean War, nurses were also often **sensationalized**. There was a real Victorian fear of nurses becoming poisoners, of them exploiting their supposed nurturing role and backstabbing the very patients they were supposed to protect. The case of nurse Catherine Wilson poisoning her patients is prevalent in the national conscience.

**1858 Medical Registration Act** barred medical degree holders from foreign places from registering as doctors; hurt women, as British medical schools didn’t accept them until 1877.

### Wilkie Collins’ *The Woman in White*

Both *The Woman in White* and *Hard Cash* portray the independent female nurse, only to squash the independence / repress it under male control.

This novel reflects the greater Victorian fear female independence—having the mentally unstable Anne on the loose, needing to infantilize Laura before her marriage, etc.

Interesting subtext regarding the source of Marian’s typhoid fever—is it a result of the swampy, dirty, morally corrupt environment (an environment that would be a perfect breeding ground for this illness anyway) that she is in, or is it because of her act of un-sexing herself when she listens in on the men discussing Laura/ Anne?

Marian and Nurse Rubelle act as doubles, both having “strength of mind” and various masculine features. However, Nurse Rubelle uses her independence and “foreignness” to corrupt ends; as a female, she can access Marian and dismiss the well-meaning outside doctors. Now, Count Fosco can use Nurse Rubelle to control Marian and make sure she doesn’t leave the house.

**Nurse Rubelle acts as the perfect Nightingale nurse**, bathing Marian and even changing the unconscious Laura’s clothing to that of Anne’s. However, Collins here suggests that the female nurse (and females in general) can only be moral when aligned with upstanding male citizens. The female nurse’s supposed subservience to the male doctor means that the nurse’s morality is only as good as the doctor’s.

**Marian’s un-sexing within the greater Victorian fear of medical knowledge corrupting women’s bodies and femininity.**

Novel starts out seemingly in favor of freeing women from the asylum. However, in the end, Laura and Marian are simply transferred into another asylum—that of domesticity.

### Reade’s *Hard Cash*
Although largely remembered as a critique on asylums, it also shaped and solidified society’s fear of the independent woman / nurse.

**Explored the hyper sexuality of the nurse-patient relationship.** Suggested that the power dynamic between the female nurse and patient became inappropriate because women had “irresponsible power” outside of the home. As an example, the female nurses would physically and emotionally abuse unruly patients.

Nurse Archbald develops sexual / romantic feelings for Albert while caring for him, and Reade suggests that she probably wouldn’t have developed these feelings if it hadn’t been for her power over him as a caretaker. Nurse Archbald emotionally abuses Albert, who wants to marry Julia. **Victorian society is discomfited at seeing the independent female nurse mentally break down an otherwise healthy man.**

Nurse Archbald’s double is the beautiful Julia, thus cementing her sexualization. Julia becomes a district visitor (volunteer, unpaid, untrained nursing type) and is portrayed in a very good, redeeming light. Of course, this contrasts with Archbald’s position as a paid, trained district nurse.

Nurse Archbald is able to be tamed in the end through marriage (and becomes a very good housewife!), suggesting that women were not fit for independent jobs.


## Chapter 3 Sex and Fair Play

Even as late as the 1920’s, conservatives believed that medical knowledge would “unsex” women and make them unfit for domestic roles.

**Contagious Disease Acts of 1864, 1866, 1869**
Allowed any woman who looked like a prostitute to be checked internally for diseases, and then if the woman seemed to have disease, would be thrown into a lock house for 9 months. Of course, very very sexist and demeaning (since it was nearly impossible to accurately tell who was a prostitute). Reformers suggested this act allowed men to prey on vulnerable, innocent women.

The fight for female doctors aligned itself with feminism—feminists wanted a legitimate voice on female bodies, and female doctors in turn got support from feminists. Keeping female patients safe was another rationale behind needing more female doctors, similar to the calling cry against the Contagious Disease Acts

Sophia Jex Blake and the Edinburgh 7 gained admittance into Medical School, but faced lots of flack from male doctors, who viewed female doctors as competition. Often subject to ridicule / assaults / sexual misconduct from male peers.

**Charles Reade’s *A Woman-Hater* (1877)**
A result of his sympathies toward female doctor students; however, still patronizing in his treatment of the female doctor.

Margaret Todd’s *Mona Maclean, Medical Student (1892)
