# July 7, 2020

Read introduction and chapter 1 of Sondra Archimedes’ *Gendered Pathologies*

### Introduction:
Chapter 1 is an introduction of the social body and how it relates to pathologization of the female body. The three novels discussed in chapters 2-4 relate to societies on the decline, and whose authors pin the underlying cause (and possible solution) of the decay on the infertile / sexually perverse female body.

Chapter 2 discusses Dickens’ *Hard Times*, suggesting that perverse female sexuality (i.e. incest) between Louisa and Tom are representative of the larger social decay caused by industrialization.

Chapter 3 discusses Haggard’s *She*, centering the corrupt African tribe’s issues on Ayesha’s perverse sexuality.

Chapter 4 discussed Hardy’s *Jude the Obscure*, touching on topics of nervousness and anxiety in rapidly shifting social / economic roles for men and women. It suggests that the fertility of a couple is essential for the survival (and moral goodness) of a society.

### Chapter 1

Discussing how the social body is a metaphor for the physical body; Herbert Spencer makes this metaphor clear in *Social Statistics* and “The Social Organism,” proposing “an analogy between the body politic and a living individual body.” **Spencer suggests that the social body is an extension of the physical body in that it is not pre-manufactured (i.e. given ordained laws on how it must behave), but that it is a natural body.** It has its own self-regulating mechanisms and ways of establishing equity / equilibrium. Archimedes suggests that such a metaphor is indicative of the shift from religious explanations for behavior to more biological / social science reasons.

The analogy of social body from physical body is reminiscent of the larger scientific discourse of evolution and natural selection. Darwin’s *Origin of Species* is very influential; **Malthus felt it only made sense that since people had to fight for limited resources, some people would naturally come out more successful than others, and this was equitable (i.e. social Darwinism).**

**Russett’s “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny” argues that throughout development, the embryo recapitulates the evolution that it’s gone through in the past millions of years** (my own perspective—this is actually not completely “false”; obviously, it’s not reliving the exact states that it evolved through, but embryos do share a marked resemblance across species, especially early on in development. Rather than recapitulating phylogeny, maybe it’s more indicative of a common ancestor / similar gene regulation networks!). This idea directly connects the individual to the species, much like how the physical body is connected to the larger social body.

**Russett’s “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny” unfortunately suggested an already-present hierarchy of the human species.** Of course, the philosophers naturally put the bourgeois white man at the top, disenfranchising other races and genders.

Oftentimes, the discrimination of one group of people (whether by race or gender) gained scientific backing when scientists tried to support it through biology, statistics, and the “normal.” However, with the development of the medical gaze (and subsequent disenfranchisement of the patient and patient’s symptoms), the “normal” quickly became merely a statistical tautology rather than a truly meaningful medical term. **“Normalcy” was equated to health, when in reality it just reflected the bourgeois social norm.**

Many societal issues, such as robberies, public sanitation, prostitution, mental health etc. used to be moral / work ethic issues, but with the development of the medical gaze and doctors’ intensive sleuthing for biological underpinning of perversity, the **scientists (and eventually the general public) started believing that these immoral people had a biological reason behind their perversity**. Perhaps, they were just less evolved, and criminologists / anthropologists like Lombroso actually tried categorizing criminal’s facial features to determine what made one less evolved. (Ew, btw).

Going along this vein, **prostitutes were thought to have differently marked bodies that separated them from the virtuous, “angel of the house”, traditional bourgeois woman.** The private parts of prostitutes and black women were heavily analyzed for anatomical differences, and there was a significant public backlash for women who did not conform to traditional gender roles and sexualities. This put the blame of venereal diseases and moral lassitude of prostitution purely on the female prostitute, rather than on their male clients. This was the basis for the Contagious Disease Acts, which subjected only prostitutes (and people who looked like prostitutes) to random, intimate examinations.

Darwin and Russett tried to argue that women were inferior to men from a scientific standpoint; Darwin argues that natural selection, sexual selection, and male-to-male transmission of favorable genes selectively favor the male instead of the female. **Russett argues that due to the Conservation of Energy Law, since everyone had a certain amount of energy, women must necessarily be less smart because so much fo their energies were focused on reproduction**, menstruation, and the emotional aspects of menstruation. (I felt so disgusted reading this. Felt like I was scrolling through an alt-right Twitter… ugh!)

Although symptoms / signs of neurasthenia and hysteria often overlapped, **neurasthenia was generally better-received** and seen a temporary nervous / anxiety disease; **hysteria was associated with women who were simply deviant due to anomalies in their reproductive organs**. Unsurprisingly, there was a pre-occupation with the normalcy of menstruation, and those who didn’t have normal periods risked being categorized as biologically inferior.

There was also a pathologization of giving birth itself; this naturally followed with doctors pushing away the midwife during natural births since now there was anticipation of bad stuff happening during births. This, coupled with the **intense focus on the female reproductive system, was the basis for the growing gynecological field.**

There was a movement for reform in mental institutions during the 1800’s, calling for increased compassion and morality training to replace whips and physical abuse. At the same time, the concept of “madness” also changed its meanings—**to be mad, one simply had to deviate from the social norm, and one could be fully alert/ aware / intellectually intact but still be classified as “morally insane.”** This affected women more than men, since women were more likely to be seen as transgressing gender roles.

In the mid-19th century, **women were seen as these sexually passionless beings who were supposed to focus all their emotional energy on child-rearing**. Female sexual deviants were termed as nymphomaniacs, and there was a heavy smack-down on children expressing their sexual desires—these deviants were supposedly less-developed and closer to the pre-historic brutes. As a result, horrible mutilations such as ovariectomy, circumcisions, and clitorectomies were done to curb sexual desire. Ovariectomy was also used to curb nervous disorders.

Krafft-Ebing argued for a distinction between perversity and perversion. Perversity is actual deviance, due to root biological inferiority, while perversion occurs when a sexual act happens out of desperation. He tries to prevent pathologization of vice, but he still reiterates the imperative of reproduction for normal sexuality.



