# July 10, 2020

## Chapter 4 Shapes like our own selves hideously multiplied

**A discussion on Thomas Hardy’s *Jude the Obscure*, and how the novel displaces the general nervousness of modern society onto the sexually frigid female body.**

**Neurasthenia seemed a catch-all diagnosis for a variety of vague symptoms**, such as headache, insomnia, indigestion, seizures, nervousness, anxiety, depression, etc. As developed in Beard’s *American Nervousness*, **neurasthenia was seen as the product of the overly-stimulating, overly-busy modern society.** As a result of its connection to academics and work, it was almost seen as a compliment to be diagnosed as such. Indeed, doctors were eager to diagnose patients with neurasthenia as well, since it was such a catch-all.

**Hysteria was more aligned with females only, and although there was much overlap between neurasthenia and hysteria, hysteria was seen much worse, socially.** Usually, a woman’s diagnosis of hysteria vs neurasthenia depended on her docility.

Interestingly, while the term “degeneration” as it related to health suggested a moral decline that was passed along generations, neurasthenia did not. When male sexual problems were blamed on neurasthenia, the suggested cause was over-work and nervousness, rather than any moral degeneration. Wow, this contrasts so much to how almost all moral issues were displaced onto the supposedly sexually deviant female…

Archimedes chooses to focus her argument on Jude’s neurasthenia, rather than “degeneration,” because neurasthenia provides a more direct link between individual pathology and cultural pathology. She claims “the problems in the social domain are related to reproduction…thus widespread social problems are seemingly eliminated or contained, displaced onto a single instance of female vulnerability.”

Jude develops a sense of restlessness because he constantly feels like he’s not good enough, that he hasn’t achieved his dreams of being a scholar. He feels like he hasn’t reached his goal yet, and when it seems impossible for him to achieve his goal, **his restlessness becomes restlessness for restlessness’s sake, thus becoming an issue, rather than driving force.**

“Jude’s personal restlessness is indicative of a generalized social restlessness that the text characterizes as mental trauma.” In this way, society’s larger issues of class immobility and barriers are brushed aside with the diagnosis of neurasthenia; biomedical discourses overtake the social discourse, and this often creates more attention-grabbing descriptions. Indeed, the novel ends with Jude’s physical decline as a result of all the trauma he endures.

While Beard suggested that neurasthenia was a product of the overly-busy, workaholic aspects of non-rural life, other scientists took it further to suggest that nervousness should be treated as a degeneration of the society and its morals. Morel suggested that the increasing number of unhealthy patients was due to a larger moral decline in society, while Nordau, Mitchell, and Kellogg believe that these **nervous traits had a more physical basis, thus allowing it propagate throughout generations and creating a weaker race.** Kellogg even suggests that two unhealthy parents will create children who are many times more unhealthy in magnitude, as compared to the parents. The above-mentioned scientists give “credence” to their claim by citing the lower birth rates, especially in the upper class.

The idea of hereditary basis for nervous disorders and weakness is prevalent, as seen by the Fawleys’ general nervousness being passed down to the suicidal/ homicidal Little Time (Jude’s son). Both Sue and Jude’s ancestors (indeed, they share relatives since they are cousins) are stained with disaster that are antithetical to the bourgeois family ideal.

***Jude* links personal affectations to the larger society when he believes in “the coming universal wish not to live”; this statement suggests that unhealthy individuals create the possibility of racial decline. Indeed, the larger social/economic/political issues that hinder Jude’s progress (and make him ~obscure~) are evidently present, but they are pathologized through the biomedical discourse of heritable mental disease, and they are presented through Jude’s nervousness. However, since Victorians were more focused on pathologization of the female body, the novel then shifts Jude’s nervousness to Sue’s nervousness.**

Sue’s deviance takes front stage because she is clearly a sexually deviant female when she voices her discomfort at sleeping with her husband, as well as someone she genuinely loves. The Victorians were of course fanatic about making sure women adhered to their sexual standards, so Sue’s nervousness regarding sex overshadow’s Jude’s anxieties.

**What makes Sue’s pathology so prominent is that she is both abnormally nervous *and* sexually deviant (in that she doesn’t want to follow the Victorian compulsory heterosexuality standard.** Indeed, being “frigid” during the Victorian era didn’t necessarily mean a complete lack of sexual feeling, but rather a lack of the compulsory heterosexual sexual feeling. The novel suggests that **Sue’s nervousness directly links to her sexual deviance and thus her reproductive peril.**
