
# July 13, 2020

Read Introduction, chapter 1, and part of chapter 2 of Martha Stoddard Holmes’ *Fictions of Affliction*

## Introduction:

**The study discusses the Victorian trope of using physically disabled characters to demonstrate emotional excess, especially in the context of melodrama.** This trope is still present today, where disabled characters elicit sympathy and sorrow; she writes, “if you want to double the anguish of missed love, you cripple the heroine. If you get to a happy ending from *those* depths, you can get there from anywhere.

Holmes makes a note that she will only be focusing on physical disability (including blindness and deafness), thus not including mental disability / “freaks.” She wants to examine how people with physical disabilities live parallel lives to able-bodied people.

### Chapter 1
Discusses how melodrama plays on the emotional excesses of the plot and the audience, and how disability figures into it.

### Chapter 2
Discusses the social expectations of able-bodied women and disabled women in terms of marriage and sexuality, and analyzed specific novels that perpetuated or subverted these assumptions.

### Chapter 3
 Discusses how Wilkie Collins portrays disabled characters, and how he subverts the trope of unmarriagable disabled women.

### Chapter 4
Discusses the portrayal of disabled boys and men, specifically the tropes of the innocent, disabled child to be pitied, in contrast to the thieving, despised, disabled man.

### Chapter 5
Discusses how siabled people of all classes and genders viewed themselves, and how their self-identity was influenced by the common literary tropes of disabled people.

## Chapter 1: Melodramatic Bodies

**Melodrama plays on the audience’s excess emotions—oftentimes, an event in the plot does not warrant extreme emotion, but due to the surrounding atmosphere / words / music (if at a theatre), the audience is cued to display excessive emotion in the moment.** This excessive emotion will not be critically evaluated until the end of the play.

**Melodramas often function at emotional and moral extremes**—the audience feels ~infinite~ sympathy for the young, innocent child, and feels ~unsurpassable~ hatred toward the villain. Melodramas also seek to right whatever is wrong (i.e. restore the status quo), in effect furthering whatever bourgeois notion the society has for its women.

There is a difference between a tragedy and a melodrama, where tragedies supposedly “earn” the audience’s sympathy (i.e. Gloucester getting his eyes poked out in *King Lear*). On the other hand, melodrama often doesn’t *earn* the audience’s emotion, even though some members may cry against their will.

The excessive emotion simultaneously demonstrates how the audience is drawn into the reality of the melodrama *and* how the excessive emotion is disingenuine, because it is specifically sought for and elicited.

**Stemming from the 1600’s, there was a ban on melodramatic plays from having spoken words (?? maybe clarify what exactly this law said), and melodramatic plays often resorted to using a cripple to portray excess emotions.** Indeed, Holmes identifies four character traits that would be readily available for the audience—biological sex, portrayed gender, race, and ability/disability status. **The ability/disability status could immediately muster the audience’s emotions (pity, anger, disgust, fear, revulsion, etc.), making it a good substitute for spoken word.**

Even after the restrictions on melodrama were lifted, the disabled figure still resonated with audience members who didn’t have social / political hegemony (i.e. poor, disenfranchised, people of color, disabled people, etc.)

**Holmes suggests the marriage between the disabled character and emotional excess wasn’t just one based on extremes, where one was emotional extreme, and the other a life experience on the extremes of normalcy. Rather, it was based on an intersectionality of discourses and lexicons between the two, and specifically how both related to marriagability, usefulness in society, eugenics, and fitness to be a mother.** This point is elaborate more in Chapter 2; basically, emotionally excessive people and disabled women shared a lot of similarities in terms of what society expected from them.

**By casting disabled people in emotionally excessive roles, only the exaggerated externalities of these characters could be explored, and the disabled characters’ desires and inner thoughts were often disregarded (i.e. they had no depth).**

**The relation between emotional excess and disability was present in the larger scientific discourse of the day**; Holmes suggests that medical journals like the *Lancet* often wrote about disability in terms of affectation, thus narrowing the linguistic difference between medical texts and literature.

## Chapter 2 Marital Melodramas; Disabled Women and Victorian Marriage Plots

By Victorian standards, women were more prone to emotional excesses. **Thus, by having a disabled female character in a novel, the emotional excess is doubled.** Melodramatic works in the Victorian era often had “doubles” (i.e. foils). In novels with disabled characters, by pairing the disabled character with an able-bodied character, the author could make a point about how society viewed the disability.

Holmes then goes on to analyze a few works to elaborate on how the doubling works:

### *Les Deux Orphelines* (D’Ennery and Cormon)
Louise and Henriette are sisters by adoption, and they serve as each other’s doubles when they go to Paris in seek of a cure for Louise’s blindness. Almost immediately, their paths separate when Henriette is almost raped, and Louise is kidnapped by an evil man who forces her to beg for alms.

Henriette is saved by De Vaudray, who falls in love with her, and they get married at the end of the novel. Louise meanwhile finds her happiness when she is reunited with her aristocratic mother. **The endings perfectly conform to Victorian ideals of marriagability for both the able-bodied and disabled woman.**

### *The Last Days of Pompei* (Bulwer-Lyton) 
Nydia, who is blind, is portrayed in terms of her emotoinal excess. Jealous of the woman that her unrequited love is interested in, she wishes harm upon the woman and almost  poisons her own unrequited love. Although the novel explicitly says that Nydia’s motivations behind these acts were not sexual, Nydia is nevertheless described as a sexual woman, thus playing on the Victorians’ double repulsion against a *disabled woman* expressing sexual desires (and trying to get revenge in not-so-savory a manner).

**Holmes suggests that Nydia’s blindness not only places her in a place of physical deviance but also that of “spiritual, social, sexual, and moral” deviances. Nydia’s story suggests that she wants the same life trajectory as her sighted friends, but she cannot achieve this due to her disability.**


### *The Cricket on the Hearth* (Dickens)

Bertha is blind…

“when the narrative plots have finally been figured out, Bertha lingers on the melancholy outside of the world of courtship and marriage.” **For a novel that really promotes domestic bliss, it does not create a satisfying ending for Bertha, who is excluded from this domesticity through marriage.**
