
# July 14, 2020

Read Chapter 2 and part of chapter 3 of Holmes’ *Fictions of Affliction*

## Chapter 2 Marital Melodramas

Continuing from yesterday’s journal entry, Holmes discusses some more Victorian novels and how they shore or subvert the Victorian marriage plot for disabled women.

### *Olive* (Craik)

Another novel of the **twinning-with-an-able-bodied-woman trope**; here, Olive is born with wasted limbs (I’m thinking muscular dystrophy? Would be interesting to actually read the novel and se if her symptoms match... hm...), and she is often described as a double to Sara, who is able-bodied. **At first, Olive does not realize the role that society has cast her (i.e. that of invalid, and therefore ineligible for heterosexual love or motherhood)**

Olive is hurt when she overhears Sara laughing at the idea of being jealous about Olive being too close with her (i.e. Sara’s) lover. Sara suggests that Olive’s disability prevents her from truly being a competitor. This outlines how society (and even Olive’s supposed best riend) views her.

Interestingly, instead of portraying Olive as an excessive woman or emotionally intense, Olive is a sensible girl. Indeed, the hysteria and pity is shifted to Sara, who finds herself in a miserable marriage and dies during childbirth.

**Craik suggests that the difficulty in Olive marrying is not that Olive isn’t worthy of marrying, but that society actively tries to prevent her from marrying. Indeed, after Sara dies, Olive gets married to Sara’s widow, thus a) completely discrediting Sara’s previous incredulity at Sara being a romantic competitor and b) suggesting that disabled women could engage in domestic bliss and motherhood (if adopted) as well.**

The novel suggests that **disabled women are eligible to marry, but only if she embodies the passionless, emotionally normal female that able-bodied females were supposed to embody.**


### *The Clever Woman of the Family* (Yonge)

Again, a twinning motif between Ermine, a woman on the wheelchair due to a bad chemical burn, and Rachel, an able-bodied character. Interestingly, it is not just Emine who is disabled—both women’s love interests are somewhat disabled due to a siege, and Rachel’s mother is disabled as well. Yonge suggests that **rather than having disability delineate the permitted social boundaries between the two women, the disability brings them closer, and both women can help each other in ways that wouldn’t be possible if the disability had never existed.**

Like Craik’s *Olive*, **the emotional excess is shifted from the disabled woman (where it traditionally lies) to the able-bodied Rachel**; indeed, Rachel is the one who has a fainting fit, while Ermine acts as a crying shoulder for many characters. Ermine does eventually give a good cry, but more in recognition of her lover’s loyalty, than any sort of self-pity.

While Craik kills off Sara, the able-bodied character, when she is unable to accept disability and is constrained to a loveless marriage, **Yonge instead decides to “rehabilitate” her able-bodied character.** Indeed, Ermine helps Rachel to understand her emotions better and how to be a better person. Holmes suggests that, “the erasure of emotional excess permits the homosocial to an extent none of the other works achieve.”

Although Sara and Ermine both get their marriages in the end, interestingly, **Ermine’s disability gives her license to. go beyond what is traditionally expected of women, and becomes a successful professional writer.** This contrasts to Rachel, who, try as she might, never gains the professional acceptance as a writer because society wants her to conform to a more domestic role instead.


### *Our Mutual Friend* (Dickens)

Jenny Wren, a blind dressmaker for dolls, uses her disability to bring her able-bodied friends together in marriage. She uses her disability as a means of creating and strengthening friendships, and she makes her friendship and advice valuable.

Unlike Dickens’ previous disabled women (recall Bertha from *Cricket on the Hearth*), Jenny Wren is described in sexual terms, and **Jenny voices her desires for romance, as well as what she expects out of marriage.** She also describes how she would physically torture her husband if he was a drunkard, further demonstrating her consonance with wifehood and the male body.

Although some some critics suggest that *Our Mutual Friend* is not a book about heritability of disease, it seems like there is a connection between Jenny’s blindness and the alcoholism that the past few generations have been involved in.

Dickens gives Jenny a chance at romance with an intellectually-disabled man named Sloppy, but this feels insufficient for a book that tried to imagine a passionate disabled female. Unfortunately, Dickens died before he could really expound on this new narrative more.

### Eugeneics

Holmes discusses the beliefs of anti-contagionists (i.e. illness is spread due to immorality, unhealthy airs, bad constitutions, etc.) vs. contagionists (i.e. illness is spread due to contact with the disease, although bodily constitution could also affect the virulence). She discusses how the **Victorians feared that “impressions” (i.e. the sight of a crippled person) could cause pregnant women to give birth to handicapped children,** as well as Kellogg’s idea that deformities multiply in future generations.

**Holmes embeds Victorian’s pity and fear of the disabled woman in the larger societal issue of eugenics, which was forming at the time.** Basically, disabled women should not have children as to prevent their progeny from suffering the same amount or more.

**Holmes concludes that “The melodramatization of disabled women in courtship plots may have looked like a safe way to work through nondisabled women's desire, to imagine the happy realms of able-bodied love by warning of the mis­eries that lay outside it, or simply to add a double shot of feeling to a plot.”**

## Chapter 3 Wilkie Collins and the Disabling of Melodrama

**Wilkie Collins does away with the twin narrative, instead focusing on a single heroine that is disabled, thereby giving her the agency to do what she wants, without a need for comparison or being left out of.a traditional Victorian marriage plot.**

Interestingly, Wilkie Collins himself was afflicted with chronic illness throughout his life. Collins writes later that his goal in creating these **disabled characters is not so much to enlarge the melodrama, but rather to explore the concept of realistic representation of disabled characters in literature.**
