
# July 23, 2020

I finished going through the factual literature originally outlined, but I would like to explore the development of the medical gaze and deviant motherhood / eugenics movement. To that end, I’ve been looking through literature reviews today and figuring out what secondary sources to look at next. I’ve settled on Peter Logan Melville’s *Nerves and Narratives: A Cultural History of Hysteria in Nineteenth-Century British Prose*,  Michel Foucault’s *The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception,* and Marland’s *Dangerous Motherhood: Insanity and Childbirth in Victorian Britain.* I have requested all three through DocuServe.

While waiting for these eBooks to arrive, I picked up *Hard Times* from where I left off last, and I definitely felt like I could apply some of the stuff I learned in the past 4 weeks to the novel. Specifically, I read the novel’s narrative as a critique on being too objective. Dickens has Bounderby and Gradgrind view their worlds purely in terms of facts, numbers, and scientific gaze, paralleling the growing medical gaze that developed in the medical field. By viewing their children /students with a sort of “medical gaze”, Bounderby and Gradgrind risk disenfranchising their students from their natural bodies and desires, their imagination and play.

The following are some interesting quotations that seemed relevant to the medical narrative / deviant woman:

“I am sorry to hear it. I am very sorry indeed to hear it. It makes Thomas no better, and it makes you worse, Louisa.”
Mr. Gradgrind’s reprimands after catching them at the circus suggests that females are punished more for societal transgressions (or apparent transgressions, at least) more than males?

“Mrs. Gradgrind, a little, thin, white, pink-eyed bundle of shawls, of surpassing feebleness, mental and bodily; who was always taking physic without any effect, and who, whenever she showed a symptom of coming to life, was invariably stunned by some weighty piece of fact tumbling on her”
Very early on, Dickens suggests that adults in a world pre-occupied with facts are frail beings who may not be very useful, productive members of society. In addition, facts are rather suffocating, even for a woman who apparently has no fancy. This is also the first mention of a physically/mentally unwell person, and it happens to be female. In the opening chapters, Dickens seemed to have pinned the blame of the suffocating society on Mr. Gradgrind and Mr. Bounderby, but here we see a brief narrative shift onto Mrs. Gradgrind’s degraded body.

“Gradgrind wanted girls to come to the school, and Louisa and Thomas both said that the girl wanted to come, and that Mr. Gradgrind wanted girls to come, and how was it possible to contradict them when such was the fact!”
Again, we see Mrs. Gradgrind’s weakness and inability to reason in the face of supposed “facts” (really, just Mr. Gradgraind’s opinions! It’s interesting how Mr. Gradgrind’s preference for facts is really just an opinion that he tries to force on everyone around him)

“What,' he repeated presently, 'would Mr. Bounderby say?”
A pre-occupation on facts seems to make Mr. Gradgrind uber concerned about what others will think of him.

“It was a town of red brick, or of brick that would have been red if the smoke and ashes had allowed it; but as matters stood, it was a town of unnatural red and black like the painted face of a savage. It was a town of machinery and tall chimneys, out of which interminable serpents of smoke trailed themselves for ever and ever, and never got uncoiled. It had a black canal in it, and a river that ran purple with ill-smelling dye…”
A not so pleasant first description of Coketown. Seems like the tiredness that Louisa feels and Mrs. Gradgrind’s frailties might even originate from the environment. This passage brings up the Victorian question of how disease was spread—was it through immorality/ transgressions, or through something more physical, like miasmatic air?
