
# July 28, 2020

Continued reading *Hard Times*. Here are some interesting quotations:


« This, again, was among the fictions of Coketown. Any capitalist there, who had made sixty thousand pounds out of sixpence, always professed to wonder why the sixty thousand nearest Hands didn't each make sixty thousand pounds out of sixpence, and more or less reproached them every one for not accomplishing the little feat. What I did you can do. Why don't you go and do it?
...
I am sure we are constantly hearing, ma'am, till it becomes quite nauseous, concerning their wives and families,' said Bitzer. 'Why look at me, ma'am! I don't want a wife and family. Why should they?
...
They would say, "While my hat covers my family," or "while my bonnet covers my family," - as the case might be, ma'am - "I have only one to feed, and that's the person I most like to feed." »

**My thoughts**: Bitzer embodies how a society based on facts, numbers, utility, and production / labor will tend to become selfish and self-focused, to the point where it no longer wants to take care of future generations. This links the society’s ills to reproduction and infertility, thus bringing the focus back to Louisa.


« Her father gives her such a portentously hard-headed reputation, that I have a burning desire to know. Is she absolutely unapproachable? Repellently and stunningly clever? I see, by your meaning smile, you think not. You have poured balm into my anxious soul. As to age, now. Forty? Five and thirty? »

**My thoughts**: It is interesting that a “hard-headed,” “unapproachable,” “repellently and stunningly clever” woman seems mutually exclusive from a young lady; normal young women were seen to be more docile and adhering to social norms.


« She was so constrained, and yet so careless; so reserved, and yet so watchful; so cold and proud, and yet so sensitively ashamed of her husband's braggart humility - from which she shrunk as if every example of it were a cut or a blow; that it was quite a new sensation to observe her. In face she was no less remarkable than in manner. Her features were handsome; but their natural play was so locked up, that it seemed impossible to guess at their genuine expression. Utterly indifferent, perfectly self- reliant, never at a loss, and yet never at her ease, with her figure in company with them there, and her mind apparently quite alone - it was of no use 'going in' yet awhile to comprehend this girl, for she baffled all penetration...
There was no mute sign of a woman in the room. »

**My thoughts**: The focus on Louisa’s face represents how stone-hearted she is; like her face, her personality is impenetrable because she does not care for anyone but herself and Tom. This is a very anti-angel of the house description, since the house is not at all decorated in a feminine manner that would be becoming of such an angel. For Dickens, it is unfortunate that she is so beautiful a flower in this garden, yet so far from the bourgeois  feminine norm.

« So much the greater must have been the solitude of her heart, and her need of some one on whom to bestow it. 'So much the more is this whelp the only creature she has ever cared for, »

**My thoughts**: Even Louisa, who is so selfish and passionless, must have some outlet for human emotion, and that outlet is through Tom. Louisa may have a saving grace through her caring for Tom?


« For the first time in her life Louisa had come into one of the dwellings of the Coketown Hands; for the first time in her life she was face to face with anything like individuality in connection with them. She knew of their existence by hundreds and by thousands. She knew what results in work a given number of them would produce in a given space of time. She knew them in crowds passing to and from their nests, like ants or beetles. But she knew from her reading infinitely more of the ways of toiling insects than of these toiling men and women.”

**My thoughts**: An example of the clash between a world of facts and the reality of life; the facts purport to describe the world fully, to describe with as much objectivity as possible; however, this supposed “objectivity” is often at odds and suppresses the true hardship that results from utilitarianism. Dickens suggests that Spencers’ and Malthus’ ideas of self-governing bodies do not hold, since such ideas make those in power immune from witnessing the poverty that inevitably results.

« The strong hand will never do 't. Vict'ry and triumph will never do 't. Agreeing fur to mak one side unnat'rally awlus and for ever right, and toother side unnat'rally awlus and for ever wrong, will never, never do 't. Nor yet lettin alone will never do 't. Let thousands upon thousands alone, aw leading the like lives and aw faw'en into the like muddle, and they will be as one, and yo will be as anoother, wi' a black unpassable world betwixt yo, just as long or short a time as sich-like misery can last. Not drawin nigh to fok, wi' kindness and patience an' cheery ways, that so draws nigh to one another in their monny troubles, and so cherishes one another in their distresses wi' what they need themseln - like, I humbly believe, as no people the genelman ha seen in aw his travels can beat - will never do 't till th' Sun turns t' ice. Most o' aw, rating 'em as so much Power, and reg'latin 'em as if they was figures in a soom, or machines: wi'out loves and likens, wi'out memories and inclinations, wi'out souls to weary and souls to hope... will never do ‘t»

**My thoughts**: Blackpool points out that forced binary thinking (i.e. the poor are always bad, and the rich are always right) will never uplift the poor. This reminds me of how the medical gaze often disenfranchised the patient who needed help, instead focusing on facts and observable things. In this analogy, the people in power are the doctors, and the patients are the poor. By trying to solve a problem without sympathy and respect for the patient, the doctor makes it difficult for the disease to truly be treated.

« Stephen glanced at Louisa again, but her eyes were raised to his no more; »

**My thoughts**: Louisa is clearly a deviant woman here, since she is unwilling to uphold morality; here, she can only be as moral as her husband is because her environment has poisoned her and taken away her womanly sympathy.
