
# July 22, 2020

Read through Kennedy’s “The Victorian Novel and Medicine” essay.

She draws parallels between medical literature, which was supposed to be more objective and factual, and narrative / fictional literature. She suggests a two-way street between the two genres, where authors of fiction used medical narratives, figures of speech, characters, and theories to frame their novels; on the other hand, medical professionals often used literary techniques of narrative shifts / sentimentality to mask the medical field’s shortcomings.

Victorian novels can use medical issues, medicines, patients, and medical professionals as characters in their plots. These elements were sometimes used liberally, to the point of others complaining; however, medical events often created watershed moments in plots and were ways to explore societal ills. Figuratively, medical illnesses could also be used to stand for other things—for example, in *Hester*, Hester’s headache “is a displaced ‘symptom’” of her emotional pain and her anxiety about someone else’s secret. The headache becomes more real when Hester’s mom starts treating her for it.

The medical gaze and the birth of the clinic (as described by Foucault) made doctors seem like fact-observing, objective people who could prove their expertise with a diagnosis. Victorian novels sometimes mirrored that medical gaze, with pseudo-medical, “factual,” highly-detailed descriptions of ailments and their progressions. Interestingly, while the medical gaze gave doctors hegemony over the patient and the disease, the medical gaze as adopted by novels often subverted this hegemony. For example, in Oliphant’s *Miss Marjoribanks*, Lucilla mis-diagnoses Tom with fever, when he is really just in love with her. This type of narrative focusing didn’t stop at diagnosing others—patient narratives, medical anthropology (see Haggard’s works), medical jurisprudence, etc. all made their ways into novels.

The seemingly objective, fact-checking medical narratives served as the basis for the entire narrative framework of some novels, usually the mystery-esque, borderline scientific / logical puzzle types. For example, in Holmes’ *Hounds of the Baskervilles*, Holmes starts the discussion with a medical analysis of an aberrant walking stick, and Watson (who is a doctor!) describes the horrible hound using words related to sickness and imagination. Collins’ mystery novels also fell under this category.

Medicine also created a sense of the self—for example, the interplay between perception, nerves, the brain, and hysteria. Possibly, those with neurasthenia / nervous tendencies due to the busy world were more talkative about themselves, thus framing loquacious narrators in novels in a new light. In addition, the sensation novel genre borrowed heavily from notions of madness, heredity, and female pathology. Finally, the relationship between author and reader changed as well, since Victorian medicine deemed unhealthy women unfit for reading sensation novels that might heighten their nerves.

While Victorian fiction was heavily influenced by medical writing, the opposite was true was well. Medical writers (i.e. doctors) often tried to be as objective as possible; however, when they wanted to present themselves in better light / avoid moral scrutiny, they might use overly emotional or positive imagery describing the (questionable, possibly immoral) procedures they do.
