
# July 20, 2020

Starting today, I will try to make my summaries more concise. I’ve been finding myself stressing to put in every detail I can remember, and I’m not sure that’s the most productive way to document for the future. I think I’ll be more broad in my summaries from now on, so that it’ll be easier to refer back. In addition, now that I have a clearer idea of what I want to pursue in the coming weeks, I’ll try to cater to those ideas.

Reading Chapters 4/5 of Holmes

## Chapter 4 An Object for Compassion, an Enemy to the State

Mayhew’s *London Labour and London Poor* attempts to map out the qualities of blind people deserving of charity vs. those who beg as if for business. However, this distinction is ambiguous at best, since the categories overlap in terms of a) their emotional excesses (elicited by the observer) and b) their perceived inability to work due to their disability.

Mayhew at first suggests that there are a large portion of the “deserving” and suggests that what they do isn’t necessarily “begging,” since they are trying to survive. However, he then proposes that as soon as this “begging” becomes a “business,” then it is no longer OK. Sometimes, this distinction can be murky.

Mayhew believed that being physically disabled made someone morally disabled and incapable for work; of course, this then makes virtually all disabled people in need of begging for a living (and also deserving of help), even though Mayhew looked down at people who needed to beg.

By putting disabled people in these two categories, Mayhew really strips the identities / feelings away from these disabled people, making a group of highly variegated people a binary.

All in all, very little was done to help physically disabled people succeed in an able-bodied world; often, they wound up in the streets begging, subject to interviews and criticism from people like Mayhew.

## Chapter 5 Melodramas of the Self

In this chapter, Holmes explores how disabled people viewed themselves, how they wanted to be represented, and how able-bodied people projected their own feelings onto disabled people’s testimony. He also channels a sort of Chalmer feeling, where less “loud” people are more deserving of sympathy.

### *London Labour and London Poor*

Holmes continues her discussion of Mayhew’s *London Labour and London Poor*, suggesting that Mayhew’s theater background made him pre-disposed to providing melodramatic renditions of the disabled peoples’ lives, even when the verbatim testimonies were anti-melodramatic. For example, even though a disabled person tries describes his own talents, Mayhew chooses to end this man’s narrative by discussing how unfortunate and disabled he is to be unable to make rent.

Mayhew often painted his interviewees dramatically by calling them “poor,” talking about their suicidal thoughts, using verbal prods to get the disabled people to talk more about their sadness and wishes for normal life, and emphasizing the more melodramatic moments of their lives (i.e. one person really wanted to see their mother, but maybe the mother didn’t want to see him). He does not shy away from hard and cruel their lives are.

Interestingly, there are a lot of illustrations of disabled people in this section. They seem to elicit lots of pity.
