
# July 29, 2020

Continued reading *Hard Times*… it’s taking me a little longer than expected. Seems like I have some difficulty reading more than a few chapters at a time, since I feel like I need the time to process all my thoughts. Nevertheless, I will definitely be done with the book by the end of the week.

« It used to be considered,' said Mrs. Sparsit, 'that Miss Gradgrind was wanting in animation, but I confess she appears to me considerably and strikingly improved in that respect.
...
Mr. Bounderby replied, 'If I waited to be taken care of by my wife, ma'am, I believe you know pretty well I should wait till Doomsday, so I'll trouble you to take charge of the teapot.' Mrs. Sparsit complied, and assumed her old position at table.
...
‘There! Stop where you are, ma'am,' said Mr. Bounderby, 'stop where you are! Mrs. Bounderby will be very glad to be relieved of the trouble, I believe.'

'Don't say that, sir,' returned Mrs. Sparsit, almost with severity, 'because that is very unkind to Mrs. Bounderby. And to be unkind is not to be you, sir.'

'You may set your mind at rest, ma'am. - You can take it very quietly, can't you, Loo?' said Mr. Bounderby, in a blustering way to his wife.

'Of course. It is of no moment. Why should it be of any importance to me?'

'Why should it be of any importance to any one, Mrs. Sparsit, ma'am?' said Mr. Bounderby, swelling with a sense of slight. »

**My thoughts**: With all passion, wonder, and morality squashed out of her from childhood, Louisa is incapable of loving her husband or even understanding what love between husband and wife should be like. She wonders why helping her husband out should be of importance to her, and this is a hint at the beginning of the end for the Bounderby marriage. This suggests her status as a “deviant woman” since she is unable to understand the cult of domesticity that Victorians adored. Of course, Mrs. Sparsit uses this opportunity to gain advantage with Bounderby.

« He was quick enough to observe; he had a good memory, and did not forget a word of the brother's revelations. He interwove them with everything he saw of the sister, and he began to understand her. To be sure, the better and profounder part of her character was not within his scope of perception; for in natures, as in seas, depth answers unto depth; but he soon began to read the rest with a student's eye. »

**My thoughts**: An example of Mr. Harthouse’s medical gaze toward Louisa; it’s obvious that Louisa, as his “patient,” has much more depth to her than he can imagine, but he is satirized with whatever understanding of her that he can get.


« The wood floated before her, for her eyes were suffused with tears. They rose from a deep well, long concealed, and her heart was filled with acute pain that found no relief in them. »

**My thoughts**: An example of Louisa engaging in stereotypically feminine behaviors (for the time). However, this show of emotion is rather negatively connoted with women at the time, rather than a positive thing. However, it nevertheless suggests that Louisa had the capacity to be a normal woman, but her toxic environment prevented that.


« Mrs. Sparsit's nerves have been acted upon by this business, and she'll stay here a day or two. So make her comfortable. »

**My thoughts**: Mrs. Sparsit is shaken from the bank robbery; this is a stereotypical example of how women were believed to be ultra-sensitive to their surroundings, and thus needed to be protected or whatever by the men. Interestingly, Mr. Bounderby’s hospitality toward her ends up undoing Mrs. Sparsit.


« My dear brother:' she laid her head down on his pillow, and her hair flowed over him as if she would hide him from every one but herself: 'is there nothing that you have to tell me? Is there nothing you can tell me if you will? You can tell me nothing that will change me. O Tom, tell me the truth!'

'I don't know what you mean, Loo! »

**My thoughts**: Here, there is extremely close physical contact between Louisa and Tom, to the point of possible incest (as suggested by Archimedes, using passages from the same scene). Nevertheless, Louisa is unable to penetrate Tom’s true feelings or act as a moral guide for him. The blame is of course on Tom, but almost seems to be on Louisa as well, since she was the one who led Tom to Stephen Blackpool. 

« Her remembrances of home and childhood were remembrances of the drying up of every spring and fountain in her young heart as it gushed out. The golden waters were not there. They were flowing for the fertilization of the land where grapes are gathered from thorns, and figs from thistles. »

**My thoughts**: A metaphor for the soul-sucking, fact-based childhood that Louisa had; here is a direct example connecting the environment to one’s health and deviant womanhood. She directly discusses how the “fertilization” aka fertileness goes from her own body to that of facts, heralding her future sterility.


« She was brought, and stood with her hand in her sister's. Louisa had observed her with her arm round Sissy's neck, and she felt the difference of this approach. »

**My thoughts**: With Sissy acting as a real mother figure and a refuge from a selfish world of facts, Jane is able to grow up in a better environment (aka garden) than Louisa. We await to see if Jane might be less of a “deviant woman” compared to Louisa. 

« looked towards her great staircase and saw Louisa still descending »

**My thoughts**:  Almost every character in Louisa’s world interacts with her with the thought of imminent personal gain, at Louisa’s expense. Mrs. Sparsit almost looks forward to Louisa’s downfall, probably so she can tell on her and gain some personal favors from Bounderby that way. This is also another metaphor for Louisa’s falling down into the trope of the “fallen woman.” 


« Shall I ride up to the house a few minutes hence, innocently supposing that its master is at home and will be charmed to receive me?'

'No!'

'Your cruel commands are implicitly to be obeyed; »

**My thoughts**: Interestingly, Louisa’s lack of imagination and passion (she’s not like Mme. Bovary, who’s stuck in an unhappy marriage and yearns for adventure elsewhere; rather Louisa is unhappy more generally with her life) prevent her from eloping with Harthouse. However, this is what saves her from truly being a fallen woman (although deserting her husband is not much better).


« Mrs. Sparsit passed it and repassed it, saw nothing, looked in, and found it empty. Wet through and through: with her feet squelching and squashing in her shoes whenever she moved; with a rash of rain upon her classical visage; with a bonnet like an over-ripe fig; with all her clothes spoiled; with damp impressions of every button, string, and hook-and-eye she wore, printed off upon her highly connected back; with a stagnant verdure on her general exterior, such as accumulates on an old park fence in a mouldy lane; Mrs. Sparsit had no resource but to burst into tears of bitterness and say, 'I have lost her! »

**My thoughts**: This rainstorm provides Louisa with a sense of clarity, not necessarily of how to proceed with her life in a satisfactory manner, but at least of why her life has been so miserable and selfish thus far. The rain helps unmask and erode all the stony layers that hide her true, child-like wonder/imagination inside. On the other hand, this rain serves to uncover Mrs. Sparsit for who she truly is as well—not a born and bred lady, but rather a disgusting, selfish snoop who is willing to swoop down to any level to surveil other people. 

**My other thoughts**: Mr. Harthouse is often described in terms of the devil, tempting Louisa into the trope of the fallen woman.
