
# July 21, 2020

Finished Holmes’ *Fictions of Affliction*

## Chapter 5

While the Victorians mostly regarded working class disabled people in terms of the innocent child vs. begging imposter dichotomy, middle class people often had more access to supportive resources and accommodations, through which they influenced public perception on disability and its place in society.

In Holmes’ own words, “In large part because the middle-class people with disabilities had greater access to meaningful work, they often transform the Providential  frame of Divine affliction and compensation into a complex and nuanced narrative that articulates work as something triumphant, even an earthly version of the compensation poor people antIcIpate in Heaven. Martineau constructs deafness as a discipline that yields power through triumph over suffering, and links it with the imagination and intellectual ability that were central to her writing. Kitto specifically writes "affliction" and his literary antecedents into a double source of power, identifYing himself both as an afflicted child and as a triumphant, divinely compensated writer. Even Fawcett and Gilbert, who refuse in various ways to consider disability a cataclysmic loss, clearly regard work with the reverence appropriate to a cataclysmic gift. Fawcett's determi­nation to stick to his vocational pursuits becomes his means of denying and thus surviving the impact of his blindness; Gilbert calls her activities "working to live," and records family weddings and other entertainments in her diary with the terse phrase, "Unavoidably, nothing done" (164).

The last parts of the section detailed the autobiographical works, novels, and letters of Martineau, Kitto, Fawcett, and Gilbert. Martineau and Kitto were deaf, while Fawcet and Gilbert were blind. All four found meaningful work despite their disability, but their own descriptions of themselves and others’ descriptions of them often painted them as poor, helpless, pathetic creatures with unusual emotions and to be pitied.

Martineau descried the sympathy and image of extreme pity, since these feelings prevented normal interactions with able-bodied people, and they prevented disabled people from properly envisioning the future. She also descried the noble image associated with the suffering disabled person and suggested that family support was very crucial for the wellbeing of a disabled person. She also suggested that disability could be a consequence of rampant imagination and hubris in young age.

Kitto eventually became a religious writer, and his transformation from a poor artisan to the middle class suggested that he was able to use his disability to his advantage and gain some sort of reward on this side of the grave, instead of waiting for God’s reward on the other side.

Fawcett, despite his blindness (brought upon in his 20’s) became a Cambridge professor and MP. He tried to normalize his blindness by pretending it wasn’t there, often commenting on things that he couldn’t see but expected to see. He was also uncomfortable being portrayed in melodramatic terms, but his autobiographer, Stevens, often fell into this trap. Interestingly, Fawcett is able to integrate well into society (although there was of course backlash) because others are willing to forget that he is blind, not because they are willing to accept him as blind. This caused him to create a “performance” of normality every day, and it might be difficult to know Fawcett’s personal feelings regarding his disability due to this masking.

Gilbert also descried the portrayal of disabled people as pathetic. She was in a lot of societies advocating for disabled people, such as Association for Promoting the General Welfare of the blind and the COS Special Committee. These societies were interested in helping disabled people make their own livings and stop their emotionally excessive depictions in popular culture. The latter committee also promoted eugenic sentiments, suggesting that blind people should not marry each other due to the ensuing difficulties; Gilbert herself personally felt like blindness could unite two people like nothing else could.
