
# July 24, 2020

Some more interesting quotations from Dickens’ *Hard Times*

« Then came the Teetotal Society, who complained that these same people would get drunk, and showed in tabular statements that they did get drunk, and proved at tea parties that no inducement, human or Divine (except a medal), would induce them to forego their custom of getting drunk. Then came the chemist and druggist, with other tabular statements, showing that when they didn't get drunk, they took opium. Then came the experienced chaplain of the jail, with more tabular statements, outdoing all the previous tabular statements, and showing that the same people would resort to low haunts, hidden from the public eye, where they heard low singing and saw low dancing, and mayhap joined in it; and where A. B., aged twenty-four next birthday, and committed for eighteen months' solitary, had himself said (not that he had ever shown himself particularly worthy of belief) his ruin began, as he was perfectly sure and confident that otherwise he would have been a tip-top moral specimen. Then came Mr. Gradgrind and Mr. Bounderby, the two gentlemen at this present moment walking through Coketown, and both eminently practical, who could, on occasion, furnish more tabular statements derived from their own[…] »

**My thoughts**: The focus on the “tabular statements” is reminiscent of the medical gaze. Each society seems to have its own scientific or medical explanation, and they are pre-occupied with placing the blame on the individual, rather than focusing on systemic, societal issues. Some Malthus / Social Darwinism vibes…



« There was a library in Coketown, to which general access was easy. Mr. Gradgrind greatly tormented his mind about what the people read in this library: a point whereon little rivers of tabular statements periodically flowed into the howling ocean of tabular statements, which no diver ever got to any depth in and came up sane. It was a disheartening circumstance, but a melancholy fact, that even these readers persisted in wondering. They wondered about human nature, human passions, human hopes and fears, the struggles, triumphs and defeats, the cares and joys and sorrows, the lives and deaths of common men and women! They sometimes, after fifteen hours' work, sat down to read mere fables about men and women, more or less like themselves, and about children, more or less like their own. They took De Foe to their bosoms, instead of Euclid, and seemed to be on the whole more comforted by Goldsmith than by Cocker. Mr. Gradgrind was for ever working, in print and out of print, at this eccentric sum, and he never could make out how it yielded this unaccountable product. »

**My thoughts**: In an overly-factual world, Mr. Gradgrind cannot rest until he knows the facts regarding what the townspeople are reading; he cannot accept if they are reading anything else. This is reminiscent of the Victorian nervousness created by overstimulation; however, here, Mr. Gradgrind’s overstimulation is very much caused by himself…



« when you are not in attendance at the school, to employ you about Mrs. Gradgrind, who is rather an invalid. »

**My thoughts**: The start of the novel is focused on villian-ising Mr. Gradgrind and Mr. Bounderby’s world view. It then goes on to discuss how they pinpoint society’s ills on imagination and the townspeople themselves, but Dickens is very obviously critical of this judgment. Now, there is a focus of societal ills onto the female body, specifically how Mrs. Gradgrind is an invalid. Interestingly, male feebleness is also described (i.e. Tom and Bitzer both being so pale), but they are usually described in much less threatening/ extreme ways. In addition, this quotation also pins the middle class bourgeois role of care-taker / nurse on Sissy Jupe (thus completing the beacon of hope and light that Dickens makes her out to be….)



« People mutht be amuthed, Thquire, thomehow,' continued Sleary, rendered more pursy than ever, by so much talking; 'they can't be alwayth a working, nor yet they can't be alwayth a learning. Make the betht of uth; not the wurtht »

**My thoughts**: This is the antidote (medically and mentally) that Dickens suggests for this diseased town. Obviously, to suggest and to create a world where Gradgrinds and Bounderbys and believe this are two different things.
