
# July 27, 2020

Continued reading *Hard Times*; here are some interesting quotes and my thoughts.

« In the hardest working part of Coketown; in the innermost fortifications of that ugly citadel, where Nature was as strongly bricked out as killing airs and gases were bricked in; at the heart of the labyrinth of narrow courts upon courts, and close streets upon streets, which had come into existence piecemeal, every piece in a violent hurry for some one man's purpose, and the whole an unnatural family, shouldering, and trampling, and pressing one another to death; in the last close nook of this great exhausted receiver, where the chimneys, for want of air to make a draught, were built in an immense variety of stunted and crooked shapes, as though every house put out a sign of the kind of people who might be expected to be born in it; among the multitude of Coketown, generically called 'the Hands,' - a race who would have found more favour with some people, if Providence had seen fit to make them only hands, or, like the lower creatures of the seashore, only hands and stomachs - lived a certain Stephen Blackpool, forty years of age. »

**My thoughts**: This passage describes why and how Coketown is an unnatural environment; the unplanned housing, the rigidly separated nature vs. “killing airs and gases,” the utter exhaustion of the architecture, etc. This is kind of like Dickens having a medical gaze toward Coketown; Victorian doctors were obsessed with teasing out the abnormal from the normal, the unnatural from the natural (this remind me of Dr. Arabella Kenealy’s description of eugenics = natural marriages). Dickens tries to identify, almost in a list-like way, all the unnatural aspects of Coketown. In doing so, he also suggests the cause of this diagnosis—the industrialization and urbanization of labor. This description also brings to mind how Spencer believed the social body would naturally regulate itself, and how some parts necessarily had to degrade, in order for the social organism to thrive as a whole. This dreary description of the degraded parts of society suggest that the unnaturalness may even spread to the parts that were originally natural, and that unnatural parts should not be overlooked in political discourse.

« Now, I tell you what, my girl. The name of that lady by the teapot, is Mrs. Sparsit. That lady acts as mistress of this house, and she is a highly connected lady. Consequently, if ever you come again into any room in this house, you will make a short stay in it if you don't behave towards that lady in your most respectful manner. Now, I don't care a button what you do to me, because I don't affect to be anybody. So far from having high connections I have no connections at all, and I come of the scum of the earth. But towards that lady, I do care what you do; and you shall do what is deferential and respectful, or you shall not come here. »

**My thoughts**: This passage gave me weird vibes, where Mr. Bounderby seems to see Mrs. Sparsit as a damsel in distress just because Sissy Jupe didn’t say hi to her? Seems a little invasive and pretentious, but ok. This reminds me of the “impressions” that Holmes described, where simply seeing something unseemly could cause (pregnant) women to pass the harm to their children.

« Such a woman! A disabled, drunken creature, barely able to preserve her sitting posture by steadying herself with one begrimed hand on the floor, while the other was so purposeless in trying to push away her tangled hair from her face, that it only blinded her the more with the dirt upon it. A creature so foul to look at, in her tatters, stains and splashes, but so much fouler than that in her moral infamy, that it was a shameful thing even to see her. »

**My thoughts**: Another example of a woman being described as diseased. Here is clearly an example of a “deviant woman” who is as far from angel of the house as one can be. It’s interesting that’s she’s physically described as “disabled.” It’s interesting that we get no backstory for her, so it almost seems like it is her choice to behave this way. On the other hand, when we see morally corrupt / unhealthy males (i.e. Bounderby, Gradgrind, Bitzer, young Tom), it is very clear what is causing their degeneracy (i.e. the industrialization of society). For Louisa, we also see why she is the uncaring, distant person that she is, but her deviancy seems worse than any of the men’s, because female deviance was wrong on so many levels for the Victorians—morally, physically, eugenically, emotionally, mentally, etc.

« Long before then his thoughts had gone back to the dreary room above the little shop, and to the shameful figure heavy on the bed, but heavier on his heart. »

**My thoughts**: We see the crushing effects of a “deviant woman.” Dickens is liberal in the sense that he is rallying against industrialism and the physical / mental strains it brings upon its workers; however, he nevertheless promotes the bourgeois ideal for womanhood—a woman who provides a safe refuge from work; by having Mrs. Blackpool be such a horrifying opposite, Dickens re-enforces the angel of the house ideal.

« It was not so far off, but that Stephen, following her hands with his eyes, could read what was printed on it in large letters. He turned of a deadly hue, and a sudden horror seemed to fall upon him. »

**My thoughts**: Seems like she has syphilis based on her sores and also the poison that Rachael is treating her with; this equates her with a fallen woman. This is in parallel with Louisa, who can also be seen as a fallen woman since she is literally pimped out by her father and brother to Mr. Bounderby, a man that she detests.

« Seen across the dim candle with his moistened eyes, she looked as if she had a glory shining round her head. He could have believed she had. He did believe it, as the noise without shook the window, rattled at the door below, and went about the house clamouring and lamenting. »

**My thoughts**: Stephen sees Rachael as a literal “angel of the house,” complete with the halo. Rachael demonstrates Dickens’ ideal of what womanhood should look like. This stands in great contrasts to Mrs. Blackpool and Louisa. Interestingly, while Stephen can be seen as a foil toward the immoral men, this distinction is not clearly delineated; as a result, since Rachael (and Sissy Jupe) are such clear goals for womanhood, Dickens highlights how fallen Louisa and Mrs. Blackpool are.

« Somehow or other, he had become possessed by an idea that there was something in this girl which could hardly be set forth in a tabular form. Her capacity of definition might be easily stated at a very low figure, her mathematical knowledge at nothing; yet he was not sure that if he had been required, for example, to tick her off into columns in a parliamentary return, he would have quite known how to divide her. »

**My thoughts**: Sissy Jupe is not a victim of a socialization based on facts, and that makes her unable to be classified with purely facts. This appears to make Mr. Gradgrind uncomfortable. 

« You have been so well trained, and you do, I am happy to say, so much justice to the education you have received, that I have perfect confidence in your good sense. You are not impulsive, you are not romantic, you are accustomed to view everything from the strong dispassionate ground of reason and calculation. From that ground alone, I know you will view and consider what I am going to communicate »

**My thoughts**: It almost seems that Louisa’s upbringing based on facts was meant to subjugate her and make her more docile when her father needed her to be. Dickens seems to critique this method of subjugating women, although he overlooks how the bourgeois ideals for women (that he supports) subjugate them just as much. In addition, this quotation almost suggests that even when Mr. Gradgrind wants Louisa to become the angel of the house that she is supposed to be, she is no longer able to because of her unfeeling, unimaginative childhood.

« There seems to be nothing there but languid and monotonous smoke. Yet when the night comes, Fire bursts out, father! »

**My thoughts**:  Louisa seems intimately tied to the imagery of fire and smoke. She feels a fiery wonder and imagination for life, but the fire is deftly stamped out into smoke by the overbearing adults. Thus, Louisa is tied to smoke imagery, which is reminiscent of the polluted environment that they are all living in. This is a very subtle relation that Dickens posits between the female body and its environment, suggesting that Louisa’s environment is responsible for her degradation. However, the connection seems to implicate Louisa more for her own short-comings, since Louisa, as a woman, is supposed to nurture her surroundings, rather than be polluted by it.

“yes, I really do wish that I had never had a family, and then you would have known what it was to do without me!”

**My thoughts**: Mrs. Gradgrind’s words are clearly meant to be ironic and comedic—seems like Louisa and Tom wish that she didn’t have a family either. The desire for sterility is of course the opposite of the bourgeois norm for women, and again foreshadows for Louisa what her future will look like in this industrialized society.
