
# July 30, 2020


« How could you give me life, and take from me all the inappreciable things that raise it from the state of conscious death? Where are the graces of my soul? Where are the sentiments of my heart? What have you done, O father, what have you done, with the garden that should have bloomed once, in this great wilderness here!'

She struck herself with both her hands upon her bosom. »

**My thoughts**: Louisa comparing her environment to a garden; since her environment polluted her, her garden of femininity and imagination and compassion can no longer thrive.


« He tightened his hold in time to prevent her sinking on the floor, but she cried out in a terrible voice, 'I shall die if you hold me! Let me fall upon the ground!' And he laid her down there, and saw the pride of his heart and the triumph of his system, lying, an insensible heap, at his feet. »

**My thoughts**: Mr. Gradgrind’s education system literally falling to the ground; the ground is no longe tenuous, and this realization may bring hope for Louisa’s revival? At any rate, Louisa avoids truly falling down Mrs. Sparsit’s staircase and becoming a “fallen woman,” instead falling ill from distress, which is more synonymous to what was expected from women at the time.


« She could scarcely move her head for pain and heaviness, her eyes were strained and sore, and she was very weak...

‘What a beaming face you have, Jane!' said Louisa, as her young sister - timidly still - bent down to kiss her.

'Have I? I am very glad you think so. I am sure it must be
Sissy's doing.'

The arm Louisa had begun to twine around her neck, unbent itself. 'You can tell father if you will.' Then, staying her for a moment, she said, 'It was you who made my room so cheerful, and gave it this look of welcome?'

'Oh no, Louisa, it was done before I came. It was - '

Louisa turned upon her pillow, and heard no more. »

**My thoughts**: Sissy Jupe is a clear example of Dickens’ ideal female figure: caring, compassionate, thoughtful, nurturing, even when no one is looking.


« In the innocence of her brave affection, and the brimming up of her old devoted spirit, the once deserted girl shone like a beautiful light upon the darkness of the other»

**My thoughts**: Interestingly, Mrs. Sparsit and Sissy are both compared to lighthouses; however, Mrs. Sparsit’s comparison is more along the lines of using light to surveil, while Sissy’s is a light to guide others. Interestingly, Mrs. Sparsit is also childless, possibly because she does not have the nurturing nature to have children.


« You will permit me to say,' continued Mr. James Harthouse, 'that I doubt if any other ambassador, or ambassadress, could have addressed me with the same success. I must not only regard myself as being in a very ridiculous position, but as being vanquished at all points. Will you allow me the privilege of remembering my enemy's name? »

**My thoughts**: Another example of Sissy’s prowess; she even confronts the figurative devil to help others, and pretty much convinces him to leave Louisa alone.


« I think your good sense will perceive,' Mr. Gradgrind remonstrated in all humility, 'that whatever the merits of such a system may be, it would be difficult of general application to girls. »

**My thoughts**: Interestingly, the penitent Gradgrind still refuses to completely acknowledge the failures of his system, still trying to pin the blame on females in general.


« Indeed, indeed, I pity him from my heart,' returned Louisa; 'and I hope that he will clear himself. »

**My thoughts**: An example of Louisa starting to care for others, other than herself / Tom. She seems to be on the track to becoming a mother of the house, but her ultimate inability to do so suggests the lasting effects of a bad environment.
