
# July 31, 2020

« Louisa raised the hand that it might clasp her neck and join its fellow there. She fell upon her knees, and clinging to this stroller's child looked up at her almost with veneration.

'Forgive me, pity me, help me! Have compassion on my great need, and let me lay this head of mine upon a loving heart!'

'O lay it here!' cried Sissy. 'Lay it here, my dear. »

**My thoughts**: This scene represents a turning point for Louisa, where she recognizes her previous immorality / lack of caring, and she tries to atone for them by admitting them to Sissy. However, her return to the fold of womanhood seems overly sentimental.

« Rachael, dear Rachael, good Rachael, for the love of Heaven, not these dreadful cries! Think of Stephen, think of Stephen, think of Stephen! »

**My thoughts**: Even during a crisis, Sissy puts other people’s comfort and desires before her own; she comforts the distraught Rachael, reminding her that Stephen’s need of emergency help is more important than any distress that she might be experiencing. This feels like a cult of domesticity moment, where women’s needs are placed after everyone else’s needs are catered to.

« A low murmur of pity went round the throng, and the women wept aloud, as this form, almost without form, was moved very slowly from its iron deliverance, and laid upon the bed »

**My thoughts**: An example of women displaying excessive emotion. Of course, this is an extraordinary event they are reacting to; however, none of the men react.

« And now, how is he to be found? How is he to be saved from justice? In the few hours that I can possibly allow to elapse before I publish the truth, how is he to be found by us, and only by us? Ten thousand pounds could not effect it.'

'Sissy has effected it, father.'

He raised his eyes to where she stood, like a good fairy in his house, and said in a tone of softened gratitude and grateful kindness, 'It is always you, my child! »

**My thoughts**: Sissy is always one step ahead when it comes to everyone’s safety. She is so overly considerate that she can almost foresee the future and see everyone’s connections more clearly; this stands in clear contrast to Mrs. Sparsit.

« It was further agreed that he should not present himself to Mr. Sleary, lest his intentions should be mistrusted, or the intelligence of his arrival should cause his son to take flight anew; but, that the communication should be left to Sissy and Louisa to open; and that they should inform the cause of so much misery and disgrace, of his father's being at hand and of the purpose for which they had come. »

**My thoughts**: Again, Sissy is in charge of negotiating using her feminine tact and caring.

« They all confusedly went out: Louisa crying to him that she forgave him, and loved him still, and that he would one day be sorry to have left her so, and glad to think of these her last words, far away: when some one ran against them. »

**My thoughts**: Louisa is expressing her true feelings for Tom at this point; like Sissy, she seems almost able to predict the future as well now, since Tom indeed feels this way before he dies.

« Herself again a wife - a mother - lovingly watchful of her children, ever careful that they should have a childhood of the mind no less than a childhood of the body, as knowing it to be even a more beautiful thing, and a possession, any hoarded scrap of which, is a blessing and happiness to the wisest? Did Louisa see this? Such a thing was never to be.

But, happy Sissy's happy children loving her; all children loving her; she, grown learned in childish lore; thinking no innocent and pretty fancy ever to be despised; trying hard to know her humbler fellow-creatures, and to beautify their lives of machinery and reality with those imaginative graces and delights, without which the heart of infancy will wither up, the sturdiest physical manhood will be morally stark death, and the plainest national prosperity figures can show, will be the Writing on the Wall, - she holding this course as part of no fantastic vow, or bond, or brotherhood, or sisterhood, or pledge, or covenant, or fancy dress, or fancy fair; but simply as a duty to be done, - did Louisa see these things of herself? These things were to be. »

**My thoughts**: Here, we see Dickens ultimately denying Louisa of the true bourgeois standard for womanhood; she is infertile, while Sissy has many children. The novel ends with these paragraphs, thus completing the narrative shift (from societal ill to the deviant female body) that Archimedes describes.
