
# August 6, 2020


### Chapter 6 Signs and Cases

“The clinician’s gaze and the 
philosopher’s reflexion have similar powers, because they both 
presuppose a structure of identical objectivity, in which the totality 
of being is exhausted in manifestations that are its signifier-signified, 
in which the visible and the manifest come together in at least a 
virtual identity, in which the perceived and the perceptible may be 
wholly restored in a language whose rigorous form declares its 
origin. The doctor’s discursive, reflective perception and the 
philosopher’s discursive reflexion on perception come together in a 
figure of exact superposition, since the world is for them the 
analogue of language.”

“In the medicine of species, the nature of a disease and its 
description could not correspond without an intermediate stage that 
formed the ‘picture’ with its two dimensions; in clinical medicine, to 
be seen and to be spoken immediately communicate in the manifest 
truth of the disease of which it is precisely the whole being. There is 
disease only in the element of the visible and therefore statable. “


### Chapter 7 Seeing and Knowing

“Disease is no longer a bundle of characters disseminated here and there over the surface of the body and linked together by statistically observable concomitances and successions; it is a set of forms and deformations, figures, and accidents and of displaced, destroyed, or modified elements bound together in sequence according to a geography that can be followed step by step. It is no longer a pathological species inserting itself into the body wherever possible; it is the body itself that has become ill. (167)”


“The genesis of the 
manifestation of truth is also the genesis of the knowledge of truth. 
There is, therefore, no difference in nature between the clinic as 
science and the clinic as teaching. A group is thus formed consisting 
of the master and his pupils, in which the act of recognition and the 
effort to know find fulfillment in a single movement. In its structure 
and in its two aspects as manifestation and acquisition, medical 
experience now has a collective subject; it is no longer divided 
between those who know and those who do not; it is made up, as 
one entity, of those who unmask and those before whom one 
unmasks. The statement is the same; the disease speaks the same 
language to both”

“It is in this exhaustive and complete passage from the totality of the 
visible to the over-all structure of the expressible (structure d’ensemble 
de l’énonçable) that is fulfilled at last that significative analysis of the 
perceived that the naïvely geometric architecture of the picture failed 
to provide. It is description, or, rather, the implicit labour of language 
in description, that authorizes the transformation of symptom into sign 
and the passage from patient to disease and from the individual to the 
conceptual. And it is there that is forged, by the spontaneous virtues of 
description, the link between the random field of pathological events 
and the pedagogical domain in which they formulate the order of their 
truth. To describe is to follow the ordering of the manifestations, but it 
is also to follow the intelligible sequence of their genesis; it is to see 
and to know at the same time, because by saying what one sees, one 
integrates it spontaneously into knowledge; it is also to learn to see, 
because it means giving the key of a language that masters the visible. “


“Description, 
in clinical medicine, does not mean placing the hidden or the invisible 
within reach of those who have no direct access to them; what it 
means is to give speech to that which everyone sees without seeing—a 
speech that can be understood only by those initiated into true speech. 
Whatever precepts are given about so delicate a matter, it will always 
remain beyond the reach of the multitude’ [20].”

“A hearing gaze and a speaking gaze: clinical experience represents a 
moment of balance between speech and spectacle. A precarious balance, 
for it rests on a formidable postulate: that all that is visible is 
expressible, and that it is wholly visible because it is wholly expressible.”

“‘with each new case, one might think that one is presented with new 
facts, whereas they are merely new combinations of facts. In the 
pathological state, there is never more than a small number of 
principal phenomena…. The order in which they appear, their 
importance, and their various relations are enough to give birth to 
every variety of disease’ [29].”

“A man 
coughs; he spits blood; he has difficulty in breathing; his pulse is rapid 
and hard; his temperature is rising; these are all so many immediate 
impressions, so many letters, as it were. Together, they form a disease, 
pleurisy: ‘But what, then, is pleurisy?…It is the concourse of the 
accidents that constitute it. The word pleurisy merely retraces them in 
a more abbreviated manner.’ ‘Pleurisy’ has no more being than the 
word itself; it ‘expresses an abstraction of the mind’; but, like the 
word, it is a well-defined structure, a multiple figure ‘in which all or 
almost all the accidents are combined. If one or more are lacking, it is 
no longer pleurisy, or at least not real pleurisy’ [31]. Disease, like the 
word, is deprived of being, but, like the word, it is endowed with a 
configuration.”

“The reality, whose language it 
spontaneously reads in order to restore it as it is, is not as adequate 
to itself as might be supposed: its truth is given in a decomposition 
that is much more than a reading since it involves the freeing of an 
implicit structure. One can now see that the clinic no longer has 
simply to read the visible; it has to discover its secrets.”

“This alphabetical structure of disease ensures not only that one can 
always return to the ‘unsupersedable’ (indépassable) element; it also 
ensures that the number of these elements will be finite and even 
small. It is not first impressions that are diverse and apparently 
infinite, but their combination within a single disease: just as the 
small number of Modifications designated by the grammarians under 
the name of consonants’ is enough to give ‘to the expression of 
feeling the precision of thought’, so, for pathological phenomena, 
‘with each new case, one might think that one is presented with new 
facts, whereas they are merely new combinations of facts. In the 
pathological state, there is never more than a small number of 
principal phenomena…. The order in which they appear, their 
importance, and their various relations are enough to give birth to 
every variety of disease’ [29].”


At this level, all structures are dissolved, or, rather, those that 
constituted the essence of the clinical gaze are gradually, and in 
apparent disorder, replaced by those that are to constitute the glance. 
And they are very different. In fact, the gaze implies an open field, 
and its essential activity is of the successive order of reading; it 
records and totalizes; it gradually reconstitutes immanent 
organizations; it spreads out over a world that is already the world 
of language, and that is why it is spontaneously related to hearing 
and speech; it forms, as it were, the privileged articulation of two 
fundamental aspects of saying (what is said and what one says). The 
glance, on the other hand, does not scan a field: it strikes at one 
point, which is central or decisive; the gaze is endlessly modulated, 
the glance goes straight to its object. The glance chooses a line that 
instantly distinguishes the essential; it therefore goes beyond what it 
sees; it is not misled by the immediate forms of the sensible, for it 
knows how to traverse them; it is essentially demystifying. If it 
strikes in its violent rectitude, it is in order to shatter, to lift, to 
release appearance. It is not burdened with all the abuses of language. The glance is silent, like a finger pointing, denouncing. 
There is no statement in this denunciation. The glance is of the non­verbal order of contact, a purely ideal contact perhaps, but in fact a 
more striking contact, since it traverses more easily, and goes further 
beneath things. The clinical eye discovers a kinship with a new sense 
that prescribes its norm and epistemological structure; this is no 
longer the ear straining to catch a language, but the index finger 
palpating the depths. Hence that metaphor of ‘touch’ (le tact) by 
which doctors will ceaselessly define their glance [39].”

### Chapter 8 Open Up a Few Corpses


Two very different structural perceptions were involved: Morgagni 
wished to perceive beneath the corporal surface the densities of the 
organs whose varied forms specified the disease; Bichat wished to 
reduce the organic volumes to great, homogeneous, tissual surfaces, 
to areas of identity in which secondary modification would find their fundamental kinships.”

“Bichat is strictly an analyst: the 
reduction of organic volume to tissular space is probably, of all the 
applications of analysis, the nearest to the mathematical model yet 
devised. Bichat’s eye is a clinician’s eye, because he gives an absolute 
epistemological privilege to the surface gaze.”


The medical gaze must therefore travel along a path that had not so 
far been opened to it: vertically from the symptomatic surface to the 
tissual surface; in depth, plunging from the manifest to the hidden; 
and in both directions, as it must continuously travel if one wishes 
to define, from one end to the other, the network of essential 
necessities. The medical gaze, which, as we have seen, was directed 
upon the two-dimensional areas of tissues and symptoms, must, in order to reconcile them, itself move along a third dimension. In this 
way, anatomo-clinical range will be defined. 
The gaze plunges into the space that it has given itself the task 
of traversing. In its primary form, the clinical reading implied an 
external, deciphering subject, which, on the basis of and beyond 
that which it spelt out, ordered and defined kinships [32]. In 
anatomo-clinical experience, the medical eye must see the illness 
spread before it, horizontally and vertically in graded depth, as it 
penetrates into the body, as it advances into its bulk, as it 
circumvents or lifts its masses, as it descends into its depths. 
Disease is no longer a bundle of characters disseminated here and 
there over the surface of the body and linked together by 
statistically observable concomitances and successions; it is a set of 
forms and deformations, figures, and accidents and of displaced, 
destroyed, or modified elements bound together in sequence 
according to a geography that can be followed step by step. It is 
no longer a pathological species inserting itself into the body 
wherever possible; it is the body itself that has become ill.”

“The coincidence, or at 
least the regular succession, of catarrh and phthisis does not prove 
that they are identical, despite the nosographers, since autopsy shows 
in one case an infection of the mucous membrane and in the other 
an alteration of the parenchyma, possibly to the point of ulceration 
[34]. But, inversely, two diseases like tuberculosis and haemoptysis, 
in which a symptomatology like that of Sauvages failed to find a 
sufficient link of frequency to group them together, must be placed 
together as belonging to the same local cell. The coincidence that 
defines pathological identity will be of value only for a locally 
isolated perception.”

“The analysis of the anatomo-clinical perception reveals, therefore, 
three references (those of localization, site, and origin) that modify 
the essentially temporal reading of the clinic.”
