
# August 3, 2020

Started to read Michel Foucault’s *The Birth of the Clinic*

## Chapter 1

Foucault classifies the three spatial existences of diseases and their treatment by doctors (by the way, this man really loves using the terms “space” and “time” literally as frequently as he can…):
1. The nosological arrangement of diseases according to a hierarchy / relations / similarities in symptoms.
2. The spatial arrangement of the disease manifestation in the body (i.e. if it migrates / metastasizes)
3. The epidemiology of diseases, as it relates to social class, geography, time period, access to resources, etc.

He also points out four considerations when classifying diseases:
1. Philosophical (more like potential causes, but not exactly) vs. historical (symptoms) considerations
2. How to differentiate between diseases are are co-morbid or related in a temporal manner.
3. Remembering that disease states follow the same physical laws as normally functioning bodies.
4. Recalling the natural vs. ideal dichotomy, where disease is a disturbance of the ideal but not unnatural.

Some interesting quotations:

### Preface

“to comment is to admit by definition an excess of the signified over the signifier; a necessary, unformulated remainder of thought that language has left in the shade—a remainder that is the very essence of that thought, driven outside its secret—but to comment also presupposes that this unspoken element slumbers within speech (parole), and that, by a super-abundance proper to the signifier, one may, in questioning it, give voice to a content that was not explicitly signified. By opening up the possibility of commentary, this double plethora dooms us to an endless task that nothing can limit: there is always a certain amount of signified remaining that must be allowed to speak, while the signifier is always offered to us in an abundance that questions us, in spite of ourselves, as to what it ‘means’ (veut dire). Signifier and signified thus assume a substantial autonomy that accords the treasure of a virtual signification to each of them separately; one may even exist without the other, and begin to speak of itself: commentary resides in that supposed space. But at the same time, it invents a complex link between them, a whole tangled web that concerns the poetic values of expression: the signifier is not supposed to ‘translate’ without concealing, without leaving the signified with an inexhaustible reserve; the signified is revealed only in the visible, heavy world of a signifier that is itself burdened with a meaning that it cannot control. “

**My thoughts**: This was in the preface, and I assume he’ll talk more about this in later chapters; however, it’s very interesting the relation between signifier and signified that he brings up; both can exist separately, but medical discourse is at their intersection.

“This new structure is indicated— but not, of course, exhausted—by the minute but decisive change, whereby the question: ‘What is the matter with you?’, with which the eighteenth-century dialogue between doctor and patient began (a dialogue possessing its own grammar and style), was replaced by that other question: ‘Where does it hurt?’, in which we recognize the operation of the clinic and the principle of its entire discourse.”

**My thoughts**: A shift in paradigm from holistically viewing the patient individually, to trying to localize disease or uncovering disease based on previous medical training. It’s like, you already know what you might find and aren’t willing to learn more.

### Chapter 1

“Disease is perceived fundamentally in a space of projection without depth, of coincidence without development. There is only one plane and one moment.”

**My thoughts**: The basis of some of his later arguments; later, he suggests that doctors might view their patients in this lower-dimensional way, trying to subtract out the patient until only the disease is left.

“The system of points that defines the relation of the disease to the 
organism is neither constant nor necessary. They do not possess a 
common, previously defined space. “

**My thoughts**: Disease is often thought in a disembodied way; of course, it requires discussion of organs, but it is often not thought of in relation to other aspects of the patient.

“Hence his paradoxical position. If one wishes to know the illness 
from which he is suffering, one must subtract the individual, with his 
particular qualities: ‘The author of nature,’ said Zimmermann, ‘has 
fixed the course of most diseases through immutable laws that one 
soon discovers if the course of the disease is not interrupted or 
disturbed by the patient’ [22]; at this level the individual was merely a 
negative element, the accident of the disease, which, for it and in it, is 
most alien to its essence. But the individual now reappears as the 
positive, ineffaceable support of all these qualitative phenomena, which 
articulate upon the organism the fundamental ordering of the disease; 
it is the local, sensible presence of this order”

**My thoughts**: The patient’s body is simultaneously subtracted against (aka the doctor tries their best to neglect the fact of the physical body) and also desperately examined as the source and medium of the disease. 


“Medical 
perception must be directed neither to series nor to groups; it must 
be structured as a look through ‘a magnifying glass, which, when 
applied to different parts of an object, makes one notice other parts 
that one would not otherwise perceive’ [25], thus initiating the 
endless task of understanding the individual. At this point, one is 
brought back to the theme of the portrait referred to above, but this 
time treated in reverse. The patient is the rediscovered portrait of the 
disease; he is the disease itself, with shadow and relief, modulations, 
nuances, depth; and when describing the disease the doctor must 
strive to restore this living density: ‘One must render the patient’s 
own infirmities, his own pains, his own gestures, his own posture, 
his own terms, and his own complaints’ [26]. 
Through the play of primary spatialization, the medicine of species 
situated the disease in an area of homologies in which the individual 
could receive no positive status; in secondary spatialization, on the 
other hand, it required an acute perception of the individual, freed 
from collective medical structures, free of any group gaze and of 
hospital experience itself. Doctor and patient are caught up in an 
ever-greater proximity, bound together, the doctor by an ever-more 
attentive, more insistent, more penetrating gaze”

**My thoughts**: Foucault suggests that as much as the doctor may try (even inadvertently) to disenfranchise the patient from their own bodies, the doctor is ultimately still reliant on the patient’s subjective terms and complaints.

“The care 
spontaneously given by family and friends will cost nobody anything; 
and the financial assistance given to the sick man will be to the 
advantage of the family”

**My thoughts**: Foucault is really against the hospital, since he believes it is not an economically or socially viable institution. He believes it is an unnatural environment for cure, and instead, he proposes more home care, since the sick individual will get better when surrounded by family (and the family can benefit from home care as well).

### Chapter 2

“It is a purely mathematical problem of the threshold: the 
sporadic disease is merely a submarginal epidemic. The perception 
involved is no longer essential and ordinal, as in the medicine of species, 
but quantitative and cardinal.“

**My thoughts**: Foucault discusses the difference between individual medical care and medical care as it relates to medical knowledge and epidemics. The need for a public response to epidemics (wow, so relevant in 2020!!) created a political facade for the medical profession.

“the definition 
of a political status for medicine and the constitution, at state level, 
of a medical consciousness whose constant task would be to provide 
information, supervision, and constraint, all of which ‘relate as much 
to the police as to the field of medicine proper’ [15]. 
This was the origin of the Société Roy ale de Médecine and its 
insuperable conflict with the Faculté (the university authorities). In 
1776, the government decided to set up at Versailles a society for the 
study of the epidemic and epizootic phenomena that had increased 
considerably in recent years.”

**My thoughts**: An overview of a government-controlled board to inform, supervise, and constrain doctors, especially when it came to epidemics.

“What now constituted the unity of the medical gaze was not the 
circle of knowledge in which it was achieved but that open, infinite, 
moving totality, ceaselessly displaced and enriched by time, whose 
course it began but would never be able to stop—by this time a 
clinical recording of the infinite, variable series of events. But its 
support was not the perception of the patient in his singularity, but a 
collective consciousness, with all the information that intersects in it, 
growing in a complex, ever-proliferating way until it finally achieves 
the dimensions of a history, a geography, a state. “

**My thoughts**: The medical gaze transformed the way medical knowledge worked—from encyclopedic to infinite.

“What 
defines the act of medical knowledge in its concrete form is not, 
therefore, the encounter between doctor and patient, nor is it the 
confrontation of a body of knowledge and a perception; it is the 
systematic intersection of two series of information, each 
homogeneous but alien to each other—two series that embrace an 
infinite set of separate events, but whose intersection reveals, in its 
isolable dependence, the individual fact. A sagittal figure of 
knowledge.”

**My thoughts**: Here, Foucault describes the intersection between the medical gaze and the humanized patient interaction. Both are necessary, although oftentimes alien to one another.

“The first task of the doctor is therefore political: the struggle 
against disease must begin with a war against bad government. Man 
will be totally and definitively cured only if he is first liberated: ‘Who, 
then, should denounce tyrants to mankind if not the doctors, who 
make man their sole study, and who, each day, in the homes of poor 
and rich, among ordinary citizens and among the highest in the land, 
in cottage and mansion, contemplate the human miseries that have no 
other origin but tyranny and slavery?”

**My thoughts**: The relation between medicine and politics is clearly drawn here; the health of the medical profession (and the society at large) is linked to a healthy government.
