
# August 7, 2020

Finished *Birth of the Clinic*

### Chapter 8 Open Up a Few Corpses

“[…] the idea of a disease attacking life must be replaced by the much denser notion of pathological life. (188)”

“The analysis of the anatomo-clinical perception reveals, therefore, 
three references (those of localization, site, and origin) that modify 
the essentially temporal reading of the clinic. The organic ‘cross­ruling’ that makes it possible to determine fixed but arborescent 
points does not abolish the density of pathological history to the 
advantage of the pure anatomical surface; it introduces it into the 
specified volume of the body, bringing about for the first time in 
medical thought a coincidence of the morbid time and the mappable 
course of organic masses.”

“So the idea of a disease attacking life 
must be replaced by the much denser notion of pathological life. 
Morbid phenomena are to be understood on the basis of the same 
text of life, and not as a nosological essence: ‘Diseases have been 
regarded as a disorder; one has failed to see in them a series of 
phenomena all dependent upon one another, usually tending to a 
particular end: pathological life has been completely neglected.’”


“ From Bichat onwards, disease was to play 
the same dual role, but between life and death. Let us be clear about 
this: an experience devoid of both age and memory knew, well 
before the advent of pathological anatomy, the way that led from 
health to disease, and from disease to death. But this relationship 
had never been scientifically conceived or structured in medical 
perception; at the beginning of the nineteenth century it acquired a 
figure that can be analysed at two levels. That which we know 
already: death as the absolute point of view over life and opening (in 
all senses of the term, even the most technical) on its truth. But 
death is also that against which life, in daily practice, comes up 
against; in it, the living being resolves itself naturally: and disease 
loses its old status as an accident, and takes on the internal, 
constant, mobile dimension of the relation between life and death. It 
is not because he falls ill that man dies; fundamentally, it is because 
he may die that man may fall ill. And beneath the chronological life/ 
disease/death relation, another, earlier, deeper figure is traced: that 
which links life and death, and so frees, besides, the signs of disease. “

### Chapter 9 The Visible Invisible

“Wear is an ineffaceable temporal dimension of organic 
activity: it measures the silent work that disorganizes tissues simply by 
virtue of the fact that they carry out their functions, and that they 
encounter ‘a host of external agents’ capable of ‘overpowering their 
resistance’. Gradually, from the moment they move into action and 
confront the outside world, death begins to indicate its imminence: it 
insinuates itself not only in the form of possible accident; with life it 
forms its movements and times, the single web that both constitutes and 
destroys it.”

“A new reversal of the relations between signs and symptoms. In 
the earliest form of clinical medicine, the sign was not by nature 
different from symptoms [29]. Every manifestation of disease could, 
without essential modification, take on the value of a sign, providing 
an informed medical reading could place it in the chronological 
totality of the illness. Every symptom was a potential sign, and the 
sign was simply a read symptom. Now, in an anatomoclinical 
perception the symptom may quite easily remain silent, and the 
significant nucleus with which one believed it to be armed prove to 
be non-existent. What visible symptom can indicate pulmonary 
phthisis with certainty? Neither difficulty in breathing, which may be 
found in a case of chronic catarrh, and not be found in a tubercular 
patient; nor coughing, which also belongs to neuropneumonia but 
not always to phthisis; nor hectic fever, which is frequent in pleurisy, 
but which often appears only in the latter stage of phthisis [30]. The 
silence of symptoms can be circumvented, but it cannot be overcome.”

“To know life is given only to that derisory, 
reductive, and already infernal knowledge that only wishes it dead. 
The Gaze that envelops, caresses, details, atomizes the most 
individual flesh and enumerates its secret bites is that fixed, attentive, 
rather dilated gaze which, from the height of death, has already 
condemned life”

### Chapter 10 Crisis in Fevers

“What was fundamentally invisible is suddenly offered to 
the brightness of the gaze, in a movement of appearance so simple, so 
immediate that it seems to be the natural consequence of a more 
highly developed experience. It is as if for the first time for thousands 
of years, doctors, free at last of theories and chimeras, agreed to 
approach the object of their experience with the purity of an 
unprejudiced gaze.”
