Victoria Liu

Professor Kevin Gilmartin

J. Kent Clark SURF Fellowship

SURF 2020 Interim Report #1

I’ve spent the past three weeks reading secondary sources discussing the representation of healthcare, women, and disability in Victorian fiction and related genres. My three main secondary sources—Kristine Swenson’s *Medical Women and Victorian Fiction*, Sondra Archimedes’ *Gendered Pathologies: the Female Body and Biomedical Discourse in the Nineteenth Century*, and Martha Stoddard Holmes’ *Fictions of Affliction: Physical Disability in Victorian Culture*—offer clear discussions of the historical and scientific contexts in which these novels were written. All written in the 21st century, the books provide analyses of how easily women who deviated from middle-class bourgeois ideals were stigmatized and pathologized in literature, and all three books make links to how these Victorian ideologies still affect Western society today. I will first give some background on overarching themes relating to the Victorian era deviant woman, and then move onto a summary of each book. Finally, I will discuss some of my own thoughts regarding these secondary sources, difficulties that arose in the past three weeks, and what I plan to do for the rest of the summer. (FYI: In the interest of discussing the more relevant points of each book, I will only be providing very abridged summaries of each book; I created an online journal that gives a much more in-depth summary of each book, and the website can be found here: liuvictoria.github.io/surf2020/journal) 

As a time of increased medical gaze, shifting demographics, and over-stimulation, the Victorian era was fraught with worry and anxiety about the continued ascendancy of Great Britain. Central to this fear was the concept of healthy reproduction and a “normal” female sexuality. At the beginning of the Victorian era, normal female sexuality comprised of passionless, able-bodied women with little desire for sex but a strong desire to marry and then nurture children. As the century went on, the definition evolved to allow women some sexual feeling; however, the definition remained just as stringent, since women could now be stigmatized for being too “frigid,” in addition to being too promiscuous. With such a narrow range of acceptable sexual behavior, the deviant woman was likewise easy to distinguish; of course, the category of deviant women contained a wider assortment of traits. For example, women who did not engage in compulsory heterosexuality, who had masculine ambitions or bodies, who were too nervous or hysterical, who desired interracial relations, or who did not have maternal feelings were lumped together as “deviant women.” “Deviant women” were often compared to “fallen women” and considered superfluous to society, responsible for its ills and degeneration. Although most women were compelled to marry and mother, Victorians were simultaneously anxious to prevent disabled women from such domesticity—seeing disabled women becoming mothers was a frightening spectacle in a time of increasing eugenic sentiments. This normative/deviant binary was backed by “scientific” justification, as well as ways to separate deviant women from the ideal bourgeois woman. To this end, many scientists put forth supposedly “objective” reasons as to why healthy women should remain at home to raise moral kids, as well as why white men were intellectually and physically superior. In addition, the increased medical gaze—the tendency for doctors to detect observable signs rather than listen to patients’ symptoms—made doctors preoccupied with sleuthing out pathologies, inadvertently disenfranchising patients from their own bodies and creating biological explanations for social phenomena. Unsurprisingly, this atmosphere fostered societal anxieties that women conform to bourgeois standards and ensure healthy offspring.

Oftentimes, the subjugation of one group of people (whether by race or gender) gained “objectivity” when scientists tried to support it through the statistically-determined “normal.” However, with the development of the medical gaze, the “normal” quickly became merely a statistical tautology rather than a truly meaningful medical term. “Normalcy” was equated to health, when in reality it just reflected the bourgeois social norm. Even before the publication of seminal works such as Darwin’s *Origin of Species* and Spencer’s “The Social Organism,” sentiments of utilitarianism and the scientific justification for maintaining the status quo already existed. After these publications, explanations—before, moral and religious in nature—for social disparities became biomedical and scientific. For example, Adam Smith’s laissez faire economics, the Malthusian trap, Russett’s “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny”, and Herbert Spencer’s social Darwinism created natural explanations for why social politics were the way they were. These provided “scientific” backing for the assumed hierarchy of gender and race, suggesting that the status quo was natural and therefore equitable. Malthus believed that supply shortages ultimately limited population growth, and group members who could not fight for survival were part of the excess population. Thus, he believed that welfare differences between classes were fair, since they represented the inevitable progression in a zero-sum game. Smith and Spencer believed that the economic and social body, respectively, were organic, self-regulating entities that were best left to their own devices. Spencer suggested that the social body is an extension of the physical body in that it is not pre-manufactured (i.e. given ordained laws on how it must behave), but that it is a natural body. Therefore, if there are inequalities between social classes, the differences are natural and should not be remedied. In other words, some parts of the social body, like a physical body, must die off for the overall well-being of the whole social body. Russett’s statement “ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny” argues that throughout development, the embryo recapitulates the evolution it has gone through in the past millions of years. This idea directly connects the individual to the species, giving credence to the importance of individual women’s reproductive health in relation to a well-bred British posterity as a whole. Indeed, as Archimedes’ *Gendered Pathologies* will suggest, societal ills were often displaced, through narrative shifts, onto the “deviant female” body, scapegoating the deviant female and vindicating the bourgeois norm.

Many scientific ideologies specifically defined and legitimized the “angel in the house” ideal for womanhood. For example, Darwin and Russett argued that women were inferior to men from a genetic and chemical standpoint; Darwin put forward that natural selection, sexual selection, and male-to-male transmission of favorable genes selectively favor the male offspring over the female. Russett argued that due to the conservation of energy, since everyone had a certain amount of energy, women must necessarily be less smart because so much of their energies are allotted to reproduction, menstruation, and the emotional aspects of menstruation. Although symptoms / signs of neurasthenia and hysteria often overlapped, neurasthenia was better-received and seen as a temporary nervous disease due to hard work; in contrast, hysteria was associated with women who were simply deviant due to anomalies in their reproductive organs. Unsurprisingly, there was a preoccupation with the normalcy of menstruation, and those who didn’t have normal periods risked being categorized as biologically inferior. Eventually, even the sexually “normal” female became synonymous to disease—by the end of the Victorian era, there was a pathologization of giving birth itself; this naturally followed with doctors pushing the midwife out during natural births since there was now an anticipation of problematic births. Despite these variously convoluted theories of reproductively deviant women, the bourgeois norm remained—able-bodied white women are to marry able-bodied white men, have passionate-but-not-too-passionate heterosexual relations with their husbands, mother children, nurture children, keep their reproductive capacities in stellar shape by avoiding education, eschew hysteria, act “feminine,” and accept everything else that comes with the bourgeois “norm.”

Moving on to a summary of each of the three secondary sources, let’s start with Swenson’s *Medical Women and Victorian Fiction*. This book tracks the rise of female medical professionals and the associated sentiments and backlash they faced. During the Crimean War, Britain was spiritually uplifted with Nightingale’s nurse image of the “lady with the lamp,” an angelic, caring figure who could tend to the moral and medical ailments of the fallen soldier. However, after the Crimean War, there was a societal pushback against Nightingale’s call for professionalizing the nurse. There was significant Victorian discomfort about a newly independent woman. Some claimed their paid work outside the home would “denature” them because “They who enter on the career of a nurse… can hardly fail . . . to degenerate socially and intellectually. The sphere of a woman’s life is so bounded by. . . the domestic hearth, that it is not surprising when separated from these she should become hard, egotistical, and even given to drink” (George Barraclough, 1879). Some argued that any moral woman could be a nurse, thus rendering professional training unnecessary. In addition, nursing was inevitably tied to prostitution, since they both involved disease (treating vs. transmitting), sexual knowledge of strangers’ bodies, and women working for wages—even today, nurses are associated with hyper-sexuality in mainstream discourse. Despite these associations to the fallen woman, Nightingale was often criticized for being overly paranoid about flirtatious, husband-bagging nurses; upon historical retrospection, however, they turned out to be a real issue, since they detracted from the angelic nurse image. Swenson then documents a plethora of Victorian works subscribing to the aforementioned tropes, where authors vilify the nurse by suggesting the danger in professional women’s newfound sexuality. She specifically points out how, in Wilkie Collins’ *The Woman in White*, Nurse Rubelle, the main female antagonist who inadvertently allows all of Sir Glyde’s evil machinations to come to fruition—acted as the perfect Nightingale nurse; this further undermined the female nurse’s credibility.

The second half of Swenson’s book details how women fought for the right to practice medicine as doctors, and the two main factors dictating public opinion toward them—sex and fair play. While many Victorians believed in giving women a fair chance at attending medical school, they faltered at the possibility that women would become “unsexed” with their medical knowledge and lose their femininity and ability to nurture children. In other words, they were worried that medical women would hinder the bourgeois “norm” of separate spheres and domestic bliss, that these deviant women would lose interest in men and become lesbians. These sentiments were fully fleshed out in a lot of Victorian novels about female doctors written by non-female, non-medical authors—a woman would start off her medical career on a good foot, but somehow end up in a (desirable or undesirable) heteronormative marriage by the end. Swenson makes a cogent comparison between these types of novels and those written by actual female doctors. For example, Margaret Todd’s *Mona Maclean, Medical Student*, offers multiple, judgment-free endings for female medical students—one student chooses to balance her career with her marriage, another chooses career over marriage, and yet another drops out of medical school due to external pressures but continues to support the feminist cause through other ways.

In Sondra Archimedes’ *Gendered Pathologies*, she argues that many Victorian authors, rather than examining societal issues through a broad framework, conveniently diverted blame onto the deviant female characters. She suggests that, for Victorians, Spencer’s work on the social body created a tenable link between female reproduction and British fitness as a whole. This link then allowed a backwards flow from the society back to the individual woman, causing individual women to be blamed for contributing to a diseased society. She specifically analyzes three novels—Dickens’ *Hard Times*, Rider Haggard’s *She*, and Thomas Hardy's *Jude the Obscure*. In Dickens’ *Hard Times*, he rallies against the utilitarian, imagination-squashing ideals of the industrial society, suggesting that preoccupation with facts and numbers creates a diseased society. However, a lot of these societal issues are side-stepped by placing Louisa, a product of this industrial society, and her ailments at the forefront. Louisa’s personality is opposed to the bourgeois norm in many ways—she is self-absorbed, immoral, deserts her husband, has a parodied incestuous relation with her brother, and is ultimately infertile. Archimedes argues that through Louisa’s attention-grabbing character, Dickens creates a diversion from the larger issues of industrial society, such as greed and corruption. Through a recurring flower motif, the garden that Louisa, the flower, grows up in is poisoned; however, because she is now a bad flower as well, she continues to poison the environment and ruin British posterity. Dickens posits that although utilitarianism and anti-welfare are wrong, he still subscribes to the punishingly suffocating bourgeois ideal for women.

In Haggard’s *She*, Archimedes explores how the “deviant female” also included those who were connected to frowned-upon interracial relationships. Ayesha, who rules over a corrupt, decaying (fictional) Amahaggar tribe in Africa, is a “deviant woman” in multiple ways. First off, even though she is white, she is very forward about her sexual attraction to the white male explorer, thus shattering the “passionless” female ideal. She rules over a cannibalistic, interracial tribe that is described as infertile due to the supposedly decreased fertility of mixed-race people. Although the Amahaggar tribe and the surrounding land deal in immoral, back-stabbing ways, the novel focuses on Ayesha and her deviant sexuality, suggesting a link between her deviance and the societal ills. Indeed, the African landscape is described with the language of “poisonous wombs” and deviously winding catacombs that resemble the female reproductive organs. Thus, even geographical malfeasances are pinned on the deviant female body.

Finally, Holmes’ *Fictions of Affliction* discusses the role of physically disabled persons in Victorian fiction as the centers of emotion. She starts the book with a discussion of melodrama, which plays on the audience’s excessive emotions. Oftentimes, an event in a theatrical melodrama does not warrant extreme emotion, but due to the surrounding atmosphere, words, and music, the audience is cued to display such emotion in the moment. Melodramas often function at emotional and moral extremes, with clearly delineated binary systems of good and evil. On the stage, a character’s disability is usually readily available, making it a good visual for eliciting the pity and fear that Victorians felt toward disabled people in real life. Holmes suggests that the marriage between the disabled character and emotional excess is not just one based on extremes, where the disabled character embodies a visceral extreme and melodrama embodies an emotional extreme. Rather, she suggests that emotional excess and disability are related based on the intersectionality of discourses and lexicons between the two; for example, overly emotional and disabled women were both labelled as excessive women and highly discouraged from having children, in the interest of eugenics. Holmes also suggests that the disability-emotion axis was present in medical journals of the day, and that this pervasive trope endures into the 21st century. Since disabled people were pre-supposed to have and elicit excessive emotions, their representations in Victorian literature were often not realistic or helpful toward disabled people. 

In chapter 2, Holmes then discusses Victorian novels that characterized disabled women—a double whammy, since women were supposedly more prone to emotional excesses. These novels, largely written by able-bodied authors, often correlated the disabled woman with the “deviant woman” because their emotional excesses endowed them with too intense a sexuality; however, since the bourgeois convention also discouraged them from marrying, these disabled characters were left to eek out depressing lives or die. A few novels dared to give disabled, and notably very passionless, women a happy marriage, but none go so far as allowing motherhood. Holmes analyzes the twin structure present in many such novels, where a disabled female is paired with an able-bodied female heroine. Through the privileges they gain with disability, the former character facilitates the able-bodied heroine’s marriage, and these “normal” marriages overshadow the desires of the disabled characters. Holmes specifically brings up two of Dickens’ novels, *The Cricket on the Hearth*, and *Our Mutual Friend*; she tracks the evolution of Dickens’ disabled female character, from one lingering on the sidelines of domesticity to one who acts on her desires by engaging in a romantic relationship with a disabled man. In chapter 3, Holmes moves onto the fiction of Wilkie Collins. Collins, who suffered from chronic illness and pain, portrayed his disabled heroines in a much more optimistic light. He abstained from the twin narrative, instead focusing on the disabled heroine in her own right. He created sexually expressive heroines who were also objects of desire by able-bodied men. The heroines find romance in a way that is not judged or questioned by society, and, in the case of *Poor Miss Finch*, the blind Lucille Finch even mothers two biological, able-bodied children. In *Hide and Seek*, even though Madonna does not end up married, her romance with Zack falls apart when they discover they are step-siblings, not because she is disabled. These plots profaned Victorian sensibilities, and as a result were not well received.

A major theme of all three secondary sources is how stringently Victorian society forced women to conform to bourgeois “norms,” as well as how easily society branded them as the derogative “deviant woman.” This phrase, although not common today, embodies a message that is still implied in 21st century discourse. For example, women are still readily labelled as prude or promiscuous, and their intelligence is often questioned by those around them. Many of the Victorian women classified as “deviant,” such as nurses, doctors, women who were disabled, “hysterical,” infertile, or self-absorbed, were frequently compared to fallen women and even prostitutes. Indeed, prostitutes were such a taboo that anthropologists believed that prostitutes were lower on the evolutionary ladder and had bodily differences from the “angel of the house.” Thus, to gain a better understanding of the “deviant woman,” I hope to read some more secondary sources discussing Victorian views on prostitution and mental illness.  More interestingly, I also noticed a disconnect in character representations of authors writing about characters they did not personally represent, compared to authors writing about characters they intimately connected to. For example, the medical fiction written by female doctors was often more progressive in challenging the “norm” compared to the more suffocating narratives detailed by non-female, non-doctor authors. In addition, disability was represented in a more positive, humanizing way by Wilkie Collins, who personally suffered from disability, than in the stories authored by able-bodied people. Authors writing about characters more intimately connected to themselves likely wrote with a sense of advocacy in mind, in subverting the status quo in favor of more satisfying alternatives. As such, I would be interested in examining the notes and fiction of female doctors to learn more about their perception of female doctors and its societal tie to the “deviant woman.” 

Overall, this SURF has been quite straightforward and rewarding thus far. During the first few days, I was kind of stuck waiting for my books to come through DocuServe. Since I had some downtime, I created a website to document my progress (liuvictoria.github.io/surf2020). This website was designed to streamline communication between my mentor and me, since I would post a daily update of my work and he could read it in his free time. Although I haven’t gotten feedback from my mentor about the website yet, I feel like it is a nice way of motivating me to learn and synthesize the information, and it’s allowed me to share my thoughts with my quarantined family and friends as well. My other main difficulty is not being able to analyze the strength of the three authors’ arguments; I have not read any of the Victorian books they discuss, and I am forced to take their arguments at face value, since I have nothing to suggest otherwise. That said, all the secondary sources I’ve read thus far were either suggested by my mentor or praised in literature reviews, so I feel like they should be somewhat reliable.

In terms of how the SURF will proceed, I plan to read one or two more secondary sources relating to “deviant women”. I hope to focus my analysis of primary sources on how the “deviant woman” represented a ubiquitous glass ceiling to all British women. I want to analyze how medical professionals, prostitutes, working class women, disabled women, and middle class women were all subjugated to a stifling sexual “norm,” and how literature represented these women’s experiences. I would be interested in doing some close-readings on Charles Dickens, Wilkie Collins, Henry Rider Haggard, and the fiction of Victorian female doctors, and draw some conclusions about how each shored or subverted tropes of the “deviant woman.” I think I would still be interested in looking through periodicals, but all these secondary sources have made me really eager to jump into a Victorian novel.


