Victoria Liu

Professor Gilmartin

SURF Proposal

22 February 2020

&quot;A Woman&#39;s Place in Victorian Era Medicine&quot;

In the 1800&#39;s, the Industrial Revolution caused a dramatic shift in English demographics—more people were coming into the cities from the rural areas, and this urbanization created new social and health issues that England had never seen before. Overcrowding and sanitation issues caused an explosion in transmissible diseases, while society&#39;s increasingly negative view of non-productive citizens caused asylums to fill up. Urbanization made it necessary for the healthcare system to come under more centralized, municipal control, while medical providers attempted to gain prestige by professionalizing their training and forming their own exclusive societies. Within the fast-changing Victorian landscape of medicine, this SURF project seeks to understand where women fit it in. I hope to investigate women&#39;s roles as both healthcare providers and recipients. The research will focus on three main aspects: 1) how the traditionally female roles of nursing and midwifery became professionalized and the difficulties in such professionalization, 2) what types of medical resources middle class and pauper women had, and to what extent they relied on self-care, and 3) how the Victorian concept of insanity related to femininity and the treatment of the &quot;deviant&quot; female. After discussing with my advisor, Professor Gilmartin, we agreed that this research project will not start with an overarching thesis towards which everything must converge. Rather, especially at the beginning, the project will attempt to map out of the collective and individual Victorian female narrative with respect to medicine. As the project proceeds, I may find myself drawn to particular aspects or trends and decide to research those in more depth—perhaps, I will even be able to formulate some sort of &quot;thesis&quot; in time for the final SURF presentation. My ultimate goal in the project is to gain a deeper understanding of how medicine, society, literature, and the female experience intersect. I plan to use both secondary sources, such as factual literature, as well as primary sources, such as contemporaneous fictional writing and periodicals. The use of periodicals will be especially interesting since I will be examining both medical periodicals and periodicals for lay people (that include medical advice or advertisements), and it will be interesting to compare the type of information presented in each. In addition, I hope to examine the reciprocity between literature and medicine, to analyze both how the language of the Victorian era influenced medical texts and how medical beliefs influenced literature of the time. Before delving into primary sources, however, I will first browse through more secondary sources to gain a better understanding of the Victorian healthcare landscape and current branches of medical literature and history research. I will be consulting with my advisor, as well as Professor Gilmore (who is also an expert in the Victorian era), about good examples of factual literature regarding Victorian medicine. Below, I elaborate on my three main avenues of research and detail some of the primary and secondary sources I plan to analyze.

In the early 1800&#39;s, there was already a distinction between the male doctor&#39;s &quot;curing&quot; sphere and the female&#39;s auxiliary &quot;caring&quot; sphere. The &quot;local woman&quot; (aka midwife) would stay with the family for &quot;a week or more after the birth, doing general housework and cooking as well as giving directly &#39;medical&#39; help&quot; (Berridge 189). This suggests women&#39;s more &quot;caring&quot; and supportive roles in Victorian era healthcare. Although such gender roles created restrictions for both men and women, it is evident that females had more professional barriers, since doctors were viewed as having higher status than the traditionally female occupations of nurses and midwives. As healthcare providers pushed for professionalization of their various occupations, female-dominant occupations often faced considerable difficulty. For example, the 1902 Midwives Act removed midwives from GMC control, but &quot;unqualified practice was prohibited&quot; (Berridge 185), meaning that a lot of female (but not male) midwives were out of jobs. In addition, likely due to the gendered qualification aspect of the job, forceps were not available to female midwives, but were available to male midwives. Unsurprisingly, the general public assumed that a trained male midwife with forceps would decrease maternal mortality. However, as WWI suggested, &quot;there was a marked correlation between maternal mortality and medical intervention&quot; (Berridge 222), and maternal mortality actually declined during WWI when the male midwives were away. This type of inaccurate assumption that males would be inherently better than females at their job likely made it difficult for female midwives to be taken seriously.

Like midwifery, nursing was also a predominantly female position that faced opposition in professionalization at first. Pervasive, negative tropes about female healthcare providers in literature made it difficult for them to achieve their full professional potential. Immediately, Dickens&#39; caricatures for two nurses, Sarah Gamp and Betsey Prig, in _Martin Chuzzlewit_ come to mind. Close-reading of novels of the time may provide useful perspectives about how Victorian society viewed female healthcare providers and how their portrayal in literature impacted their professionalization. It wasn&#39;t until the mid/late 1800&#39;s that nursing became more respectable, although the path to professionalization of female healthcare roles was clearly influenced by society&#39;s preconceived social roles and stereotypes for women. It would be interesting to learn more about the current research regarding the intersection between female professionalism and fiction of the time; Swenson&#39;s _Medical Women and Victorian Fiction_ may provide a good starting point for this. In addition, primary sources such as Florence Nightingale&#39;s _Notes on Nursing_ and nursing periodicals such as _Hospital Nursing Mirror_ and _Nurse&#39;s Journal_ can shed more light on the experiences and difficulties of female nurses in their struggle for professionalization—what caused society to accept their professionalization in the late 1800&#39;s when they were portrayed as such Dickensian caricatures in the early 1800&#39;s? Finally, with Elizabeth Garrett&#39;s entrance into medical school in 1865, women were able to have the opportunity to practice medicine as doctors for the first time, and periodicals such as _The Magazine of the London School of Medicine for Women_ would be of use in this topic.

In addition to women&#39;s role in healthcare, this research project will also investigate healthcare&#39;s role in women&#39;s lives. While upper class women generally had access to quality home care, there remains the question of what medical recourse lower and lower-middle class women had when they were sick. This is an especially important socio-economic question because poor women were chronically malnourished (as shown by Dr. Edward Smith&#39;s report for the Privy Council) as a result of the best food going to the male breadwinner. Since &quot;the provision of adequate or better nutrition is of fundamental importance in increasing resistance to disease&quot; (Berridge 199), it could be interesting to investigate if poor women were more prone to physical ailments and how this impacted the type of medical care they had. Would these women have access to decent healthcare, or were they left more to fend for themselves? Where would they seek help? A nascent tripartite hospital system, composed of specialized, voluntary, and poor house infirmaries, was established in the 1800&#39;s, and hospitals started popping up in larger numbers in England for the first time. While voluntary hospitals offered free treatment with subscription, the relatively small number of hospital beds in England in the early 1800&#39;s prevented hospitals from being a significant form of healthcare. Throughout the mid-1800&#39;s, hospitals became more numerous, and it would be interesting to investigate if this institution was able to adequately cater to middle class and lower class women by the late 1800&#39;s. This part of the research will likely be conducted through laborious, thorough perusal of medical periodicals of the time, which contain detailed case-studies. Conveniently, some of the case studies have detailed descriptions of the social and economic statuses of the patients, as well as gender, which can aid in elucidating the poor / middle class woman&#39;s doctor-patient experience.

Many women of the time also resorted to self-help, home-based medicine, encompassing both alternative and more traditionally-recommended treatments. An interesting starting point could be _Aristotle&#39;s Works_, &quot;a popular work on conception and childbirth&quot; (Berridge 190); this work provided self-help for the lay woman in these topics. In addition, medical periodicals of the time included advertisements for &quot;drugs, pharmaceuticals, and medical equipment&quot; (Peterson 32), medicinal recipes, as well as medical advice for the lay person (such as _The Doctor; a medical penny magazine_). These periodicals may give an indication of how much a woman was expected to rely on self-care, as opposed to doctor-based care, at the time. Alternative, or &quot;fringe,&quot; medicine had their own periodicals too, such as _Transactions of the Phrenological Society and British Journal of Homeopathy_ and _Vegetarian Messenger_. Delving into these self-help books and periodicals will doubtless furnish a more comprehensive view of how illness was treated at the individual and collective planes for women. In conjunction with society&#39;s emphasis on self-care, municipal efforts to regulate health also started to take shape in the mid-1800&#39;s, from the passing of the relatively ineffective 1848 Public Health Act, to the 1866 Sanitary Act, the 1871 Local Government Act, and culminating in the effective, broad-reaching Public Health Act of 1875. Time permitting, this research project may also attempt to illuminate how changes in public preventative health policy such as improved sewage systems affected disease.

In addition to physical health, mental health was also explored in literature and periodicals of the time. Doerner argued that as a result of the Industrial Revolution, families were more willing to give up non-productive family members to institutionalized asylum care, since such people were seen as burdens in the new, fast-paced economy. Asylums started springing up and being filled with more women than men, and more paupers than middle class / upper class people (Berridge). In creating a comprehensive map of women&#39;s healthcare of the time, it would be interesting to explore how Victorian society viewed &quot;deviant&quot;—indeed, if they would even be considered deviant by today&#39;s standards—women and how they were represented in literature and periodicals. As more women filled the asylums, femininity itself became viewed as a mental disease; &quot;puerperal and menopausal insanity&quot; and &quot;hysterectomy&quot; became common medical terms. Subsequently, the society had strong feelings about female reproductive functions. In Archimedes&#39; _Gendered Pathologies: The Female Body and Biomedical Discourse in the Nineteenth-Century English Novel_, she argues that the relationship between the physical female body and the social female body is bridged by the creation of offspring for the society. As a result, &quot;non-reproductive women are pathologized in medical writing&quot; (Logan 969). On the other hand, as seen in Stoddard Holmes&#39; _Fictions of Affliction: Physical Disability in Victorian Culture_, society simultaneously fretted at the reproductive success of women who were mentally or physically disabled, as this embodied a &quot;fear that reproduction will transmit disability to a new generation&quot; (Logan 969). This seeming double standard imposed on reproduction does not even seem too foreign from today&#39;s double standards on female bodies, and it would be interesting to investigate how the contemporaneous femininity-insanity relationship came about and how the definition of femininity changed as a result. More factual literature in this vein include Marland&#39;s _Dangerous Motherhood: Insanity and Childbirth in Victorian Britain_, as well as Suzuki&#39;s _Madness at Home: The Psychiatrist, the Patient, and the Family in England, 1820-1860_. Some relevant novels of the time include Braddon&#39;s _Lady Audley&#39;s Secret_ and Dickens&#39; _Hard Times_, and a relevant periodical would be _Journal of Mental Science_ (later renamed _British Journal of Psychiatry_). I plan to use these sources to gain a clearer picture of how society and doctors viewed women in asylums. I also hope to close-read the medical and lay periodicals to investigate how the language created a lens through which these women were seen and treated.

The relationship between medicine and women was a dynamic one during the Victorian era, and the wealth of periodicals and fiction from that time make it a worthwhile endeavor to examine the intersection of medicine and literature. Within the last twenty years, the increased literary pursuit of medical history provides a good lay of the land for such research. Through these resources, I hope to learn more about the professionalization of traditionally female healthcare roles, the medical recourse women had for physical ailments, and the relationship between femininity and insanity. The beginning of the project will focus on using factual literature to understand more about the time, while the second half will be about elucidating trends and supporting these claims with evidence from primary sources. Since this is a project about history that uses literary analysis, rather than historical analysis, I will be sure to avoid making ahistorical, conjectural claims and try to keep all my claims logically backed by primary sources. I plan on using both the Caltech library (and DocuServe) and the Huntington Library (using a Reader&#39;s Card) to access primary and secondary sources. Finally, in preparation for the final SURF presentation, I will also keep an eye out for interesting visuals in the novels and periodicals that I analyze.

Acknowledgements:

I want to thank Professor Gilmartin for agreeing to take me under his research wing and for providing me with the introductory reading materials to write the proposal. I want to thank Professor Gilmore for supplying me with some reading materials as well.

Bibliography

Berridge, V. (1990). Health and medicine. In F. Thompson (Ed.), _The Cambridge Social History of Britain, 1750–1950_ (pp. 171-242). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521257909.005

Broman, T. (2003). The Medical Sciences. In R. Porter (Ed.), _The Cambridge History of Science_ (The Cambridge History of Science, pp. 463-484). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521572439.021

Holmes, Martha Stoddard. _Fictions of Affliction: Physical Disability in Victorian Culture_. Univ. of Michigan Press, 2012.

Kennedy, Meegan. &quot;The Victorian Novel and Medicine.&quot; _The Oxford Handbook of the Victorian Novel_, by Lisa Rodensky, Oxford University Press, 2013.

Linda Simon, Meegan Kennedy, _Revising the Clinic: Vision and Representation in Victorian Medical Narrative and the Novel, Social History of Medicine_, Volume 25, Issue 2, May 2012, Pages 555–556, https://doi.org/10.1093/shm/hkr173

Logan, Peter. &quot;Literature and Medicine: Twenty-Five Years Later.&quot; _Literature Compass_, 2008, onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1741-4113.2008.00563.x.

Peterson, Jeanne. &quot;Medicine.&quot; _Victorian Periodicals and Victorian Society_, by Jerry D. Vann, Univ. of Toronto Pr., 1995, pp. 22–44.
